The Project Gutenberg eBook of Right Ho, Jeeves
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Right Ho, Jeeves

Author: P. G. Wodehouse

Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10554]
                Most recently updated: January 16, 2025

Language: English

Credits: Christine Gehring, Richard Prairie, and the Project
        Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIGHT HO, JEEVES ***
RIGHT HO, JEEVES

By

P. G. WODEHOUSE




To

RAYMOND NEEDHAM, K.C.

WITH AFFECTION AND ADMIRATION




-1-


“Jeeves,” I said, “may I speak frankly?”

“Certainly, sir.”

“What I have to say may wound you.”

“Not at all, sir.”

“Well, then----”

No--wait. Hold the line a minute. I’ve gone off the rails.


I don’t know if you have had the same experience, but the snag I always
come up against when I’m telling a story is this dashed difficult
problem of where to begin it. It’s a thing you don’t want to go wrong
over, because one false step and you’re sunk. I mean, if you fool about
too long at the start, trying to establish atmosphere, as they call it,
and all that sort of rot, you fail to grip and the customers walk out
on you.

Get off the mark, on the other hand, like a scalded cat, and your
public is at a loss. It simply raises its eyebrows, and can’t make out
what you’re talking about.

And in opening my report of the complex case of Gussie Fink-Nottle,
Madeline Bassett, my Cousin Angela, my Aunt Dahlia, my Uncle Thomas,
young Tuppy Glossop and the cook, Anatole, with the above spot of
dialogue, I see that I have made the second of these two floaters.

I shall have to hark back a bit. And taking it for all in all and
weighing this against that, I suppose the affair may be said to have
had its inception, if inception is the word I want, with that visit of
mine to Cannes. If I hadn’t gone to Cannes, I shouldn’t have met the
Bassett or bought that white mess jacket, and Angela wouldn’t have met
her shark, and Aunt Dahlia wouldn’t have played baccarat.

Yes, most decidedly, Cannes was the _point d’appui_.

Right ho, then. Let me marshal my facts.

I went to Cannes--leaving Jeeves behind, he having intimated that he
did not wish to miss Ascot--round about the beginning of June. With
me travelled my Aunt Dahlia and her daughter Angela. Tuppy Glossop,
Angela’s betrothed, was to have been of the party, but at the last
moment couldn’t get away. Uncle Tom, Aunt Dahlia’s husband, remained at
home, because he can’t stick the South of France at any price.

So there you have the layout--Aunt Dahlia, Cousin Angela and self off
to Cannes round about the beginning of June.

All pretty clear so far, what?

We stayed at Cannes about two months, and except for the fact that Aunt
Dahlia lost her shirt at baccarat and Angela nearly got inhaled by a
shark while aquaplaning, a pleasant time was had by all.

On July the twenty-fifth, looking bronzed and fit, I accompanied aunt
and child back to London. At seven p.m. on July the twenty-sixth we
alighted at Victoria. And at seven-twenty or thereabouts we parted
with mutual expressions of esteem--they to shove off in Aunt Dahlia’s
car to Brinkley Court, her place in Worcestershire, where they were
expecting to entertain Tuppy in a day or two; I to go to the flat, drop
my luggage, clean up a bit, and put on the soup and fish preparatory to
pushing round to the Drones for a bite of dinner.

And it was while I was at the flat, towelling the torso after a
much-needed rinse, that Jeeves, as we chatted of this and that--picking
up the threads, as it were--suddenly brought the name of Gussie
Fink-Nottle into the conversation.

As I recall it, the dialogue ran something as follows:

SELF: Well, Jeeves, here we are, what?

JEEVES: Yes, sir.

SELF: I mean to say, home again.

JEEVES: Precisely, sir.

SELF: Seems ages since I went away.

JEEVES: Yes, sir.

SELF: Have a good time at Ascot?

JEEVES: Most agreeable, sir.

SELF: Win anything?

JEEVES: Quite a satisfactory sum, thank you, sir.

SELF: Good. Well, Jeeves, what news on the Rialto? Anybody been phoning
or calling or anything during my abs.?

JEEVES: Mr. Fink-Nottle, sir, has been a frequent caller.

I stared. Indeed, it would not be too much to say that I gaped.

“Mr. Fink-Nottle?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You don’t mean Mr. Fink-Nottle?”

“Yes, sir.”

“But Mr. Fink-Nottle’s not in London?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Well, I’m blowed.”

And I’ll tell you why I was blowed. I found it scarcely possible to
give credence to his statement. This Fink-Nottle, you see, was one of
those freaks you come across from time to time during life’s journey
who can’t stand London. He lived year in and year out, covered with
moss, in a remote village down in Lincolnshire, never coming up even
for the Eton and Harrow match. And when I asked him once if he didn’t
find the time hang a bit heavy on his hands, he said, no, because he
had a pond in his garden and studied the habits of newts.

I couldn’t imagine what could have brought the chap up to the great
city. I would have been prepared to bet that as long as the supply of
newts didn’t give out, nothing could have shifted him from that village
of his.

“Are you sure?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You got the name correctly? Fink-Nottle?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Well, it’s the most extraordinary thing. It must be five years since
he was in London. He makes no secret of the fact that the place gives
him the pip. Until now, he has always stayed glued to the country,
completely surrounded by newts.”

“Sir?”

“Newts, Jeeves. Mr. Fink-Nottle has a strong newt complex. You must
have heard of newts. Those little sort of lizard things that charge
about in ponds.”

“Oh, yes, sir. The aquatic members of the family Salamandridae which
constitute the genus Molge.”

“That’s right. Well, Gussie has always been a slave to them. He used to
keep them at school.”

“I believe young gentlemen frequently do, sir.”

“He kept them in his study in a kind of glass-tank arrangement, and
pretty niffy the whole thing was, I recall. I suppose one ought to have
been able to see what the end would be even then, but you know what
boys are. Careless, heedless, busy about our own affairs, we scarcely
gave this kink in Gussie’s character a thought. We may have exchanged
an occasional remark about it taking all sorts to make a world, but
nothing more. You can guess the sequel. The trouble spread.”

“Indeed, sir?”

“Absolutely, Jeeves. The craving grew upon him. The newts got him.
Arrived at man’s estate, he retired to the depths of the country and
gave his life up to these dumb chums. I suppose he used to tell himself
that he could take them or leave them alone, and then found--too
late--that he couldn’t.”

“It is often the way, sir.”

“Too true, Jeeves. At any rate, for the last five years he has been
living at this place of his down in Lincolnshire, as confirmed a
species-shunning hermit as ever put fresh water in the tank every
second day and refused to see a soul. That’s why I was so amazed when
you told me he had suddenly risen to the surface like this. I still
can’t believe it. I am inclined to think that there must be some
mistake, and that this bird who has been calling here is some different
variety of Fink-Nottle. The chap I know wears horn-rimmed spectacles
and has a face like a fish. How does that check up with your data?”

“The gentleman who came to the flat wore horn-rimmed spectacles, sir.”

“And looked like something on a slab?”

“Possibly there was a certain suggestion of the piscine, sir.”

“Then it must be Gussie, I suppose. But what on earth can have brought
him up to London?”

“I am in a position to explain that, sir. Mr. Fink-Nottle confided to
me his motive in visiting the metropolis. He came because the young
lady is here.”

“Young lady?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You don’t mean he’s in love?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Well, I’m dashed. I’m really dashed. I positively am dashed, Jeeves.”

And I was too. I mean to say, a joke’s a joke, but there are limits.

Then I found my mind turning to another aspect of this rummy affair.
Conceding the fact that Gussie Fink-Nottle, against all the ruling
of the form book, might have fallen in love, why should he have been
haunting my flat like this? No doubt the occasion was one of those when
a fellow needs a friend, but I couldn’t see what had made him pick on
me.

It wasn’t as if he and I were in any way bosom. We had seen a lot of
each other at one time, of course, but in the last two years I hadn’t
had so much as a post card from him.

I put all this to Jeeves:

“Odd, his coming to me. Still, if he did, he did. No argument about
that. It must have been a nasty jar for the poor perisher when he found
I wasn’t here.”

“No, sir. Mr. Fink-Nottle did not call to see you, sir.”

“Pull yourself together, Jeeves. You’ve just told me that this is what
he has been doing, and assiduously, at that.”

“It was I with whom he was desirous of establishing communication, sir.”

“You? But I didn’t know you had ever met him.”

“I had not had that pleasure until he called here, sir. But it appears
that Mr. Sipperley, a fellow student with whom Mr. Fink-Nottle had been
at the university, recommended him to place his affairs in my hands.”

The mystery had conked. I saw all. As I dare say you know, Jeeves’s
reputation as a counsellor has long been established among the
cognoscenti, and the first move of any of my little circle on
discovering themselves in any form of soup is always to roll round and
put the thing up to him. And when he’s got A out of a bad spot, A puts
B on to him. And then, when he has fixed up B, B sends C along. And so
on, if you get my drift, and so forth.

That’s how these big consulting practices like Jeeves’s grow. Old
Sippy, I knew, had been deeply impressed by the man’s efforts on his
behalf at the time when he was trying to get engaged to Elizabeth Moon,
so it was not to be wondered at that he should have advised Gussie to
apply. Pure routine, you might say.

“Oh, you’re acting for him, are you?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Now I follow. Now I understand. And what is Gussie’s trouble?”

“Oddly enough, sir, precisely the same as that of Mr. Sipperley when
I was enabled to be of assistance to him. No doubt you recall Mr.
Sipperley’s predicament, sir. Deeply attached to Miss Moon, he suffered
from a rooted diffidence which made it impossible for him to speak.”

I nodded.

“I remember. Yes, I recall the Sipperley case. He couldn’t bring
himself to the scratch. A marked coldness of the feet, was there not? I
recollect you saying he was letting--what was it?--letting something do
something. Cats entered into it, if I am not mistaken.”

“Letting ‘I dare not’ wait upon ‘I would’, sir.”

“That’s right. But how about the cats?”

“Like the poor cat i’ the adage, sir.”

“Exactly. It beats me how you think up these things. And Gussie, you
say, is in the same posish?”

“Yes, sir. Each time he endeavours to formulate a proposal of marriage,
his courage fails him.”

“And yet, if he wants this female to be his wife, he’s got to say so,
what? I mean, only civil to mention it.”

“Precisely, sir.”

I mused.

“Well, I suppose this was inevitable, Jeeves. I wouldn’t have thought
that this Fink-Nottle would ever have fallen a victim to the divine
_p_, but, if he has, no wonder he finds the going sticky.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Look at the life he’s led.”

“Yes, sir.”

“I don’t suppose he has spoken to a girl for years. What a lesson this
is to us, Jeeves, not to shut ourselves up in country houses and stare
into glass tanks. You can’t be the dominant male if you do that sort of
thing. In this life, you can choose between two courses. You can either
shut yourself up in a country house and stare into tanks, or you can be
a dasher with the sex. You can’t do both.”

“No, sir.”

I mused once more. Gussie and I, as I say, had rather lost touch, but
all the same I was exercised about the poor fish, as I am about all my
pals, close or distant, who find themselves treading upon Life’s banana
skins. It seemed to me that he was up against it.

I threw my mind back to the last time I had seen him. About two years
ago, it had been. I had looked in at his place while on a motor trip,
and he had put me right off my feed by bringing a couple of green
things with legs to the luncheon table, crooning over them like a
young mother and eventually losing one of them in the salad. That
picture, rising before my eyes, didn’t give me much confidence in the
unfortunate goof’s ability to woo and win, I must say. Especially if
the girl he had earmarked was one of these tough modern thugs, all
lipstick and cool, hard, sardonic eyes, as she probably was.

“Tell me, Jeeves,” I said, wishing to know the worst, “what sort of a
girl is this girl of Gussie’s?”

“I have not met the young lady, sir. Mr. Fink-Nottle speaks highly of
her attractions.”

“Seemed to like her, did he?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Did he mention her name? Perhaps I know her.”

“She is a Miss Bassett, sir. Miss Madeline Bassett.”

“What?”

“Yes, sir.”

I was deeply intrigued.

“Egad, Jeeves! Fancy that. It’s a small world, isn’t it, what?”

“The young lady is an acquaintance of yours, sir?”

“I know her well. Your news has relieved my mind, Jeeves. It makes
the whole thing begin to seem far more like a practical working
proposition.”

“Indeed, sir?”

“Absolutely. I confess that until you supplied this information I was
feeling profoundly dubious about poor old Gussie’s chances of inducing
any spinster of any parish to join him in the saunter down the aisle.
You will agree with me that he is not everybody’s money.”

“There may be something in what you say, sir.”

“Cleopatra wouldn’t have liked him.”

“Possibly not, sir.”

“And I doubt if he would go any too well with Tallulah Bankhead.”

“No, sir.”

“But when you tell me that the object of his affections is Miss
Bassett, why, then, Jeeves, hope begins to dawn a bit. He’s just the
sort of chap a girl like Madeline Bassett might scoop in with relish.”

This Bassett, I must explain, had been a fellow visitor of ours at
Cannes; and as she and Angela had struck up one of those effervescent
friendships which girls do strike up, I had seen quite a bit of her.
Indeed, in my moodier moments it sometimes seemed to me that I could
not move a step without stubbing my toe on the woman.

And what made it all so painful and distressing was that the more we
met, the less did I seem able to find to say to her.

You know how it is with some girls. They seem to take the stuffing
right out of you. I mean to say, there is something about their
personality that paralyses the vocal cords and reduces the contents
of the brain to cauliflower. It was like that with this Bassett and
me; so much so that I have known occasions when for minutes at a
stretch Bertram Wooster might have been observed fumbling with the
tie, shuffling the feet, and behaving in all other respects in her
presence like the complete dumb brick. When, therefore, she took her
departure some two weeks before we did, you may readily imagine that,
in Bertram’s opinion, it was not a day too soon.

It was not her beauty, mark you, that thus numbed me. She was a pretty
enough girl in a droopy, blonde, saucer-eyed way, but not the sort of
breath-taker that takes the breath.

No, what caused this disintegration in a usually fairly fluent prattler
with the sex was her whole mental attitude. I don’t want to wrong
anybody, so I won’t go so far as to say that she actually wrote poetry,
but her conversation, to my mind, was of a nature calculated to excite
the liveliest suspicions. Well, I mean to say, when a girl suddenly
asks you out of a blue sky if you don’t sometimes feel that the stars
are God’s daisy-chain, you begin to think a bit.

As regards the fusing of her soul and mine, therefore, there was
nothing doing. But with Gussie, the posish was entirely different. The
thing that had stymied me--viz. that this girl was obviously all loaded
down with ideals and sentiment and what not--was quite in order as far
as he was concerned.

Gussie had always been one of those dreamy, soulful birds--you can’t
shut yourself up in the country and live only for newts, if you’re
not--and I could see no reason why, if he could somehow be induced to
get the low, burning words off his chest, he and the Bassett shouldn’t
hit it off like ham and eggs.

“She’s just the type for him,” I said.

“I am most gratified to hear it, sir.”

“And he’s just the type for her. In fine, a good thing and one to be
pushed along with the utmost energy. Strain every nerve, Jeeves.”

“Very good, sir,” replied the honest fellow. “I will attend to the
matter at once.”

Now up to this point, as you will doubtless agree, what you might call
a perfect harmony had prevailed. Friendly gossip between employer and
employed, and everything as sweet as a nut. But at this juncture, I
regret to say, there was an unpleasant switch. The atmosphere suddenly
changed, the storm clouds began to gather, and before we knew where we
were, the jarring note had come bounding on the scene. I have known
this to happen before in the Wooster home.

The first intimation I had that things were about to hot up was a
pained and disapproving cough from the neighbourhood of the carpet.
For, during the above exchanges, I should explain, while I, having
dried the frame, had been dressing in a leisurely manner, donning here
a sock, there a shoe, and gradually climbing into the vest, the shirt,
the tie, and the knee-length, Jeeves had been down on the lower level,
unpacking my effects.

He now rose, holding a white object. And at the sight of it, I realized
that another of our domestic crises had arrived, another of those
unfortunate clashes of will between two strong men, and that Bertram,
unless he remembered his fighting ancestors and stood up for his
rights, was about to be put upon.

I don’t know if you were at Cannes this summer. If you were, you will
recall that anybody with any pretensions to being the life and soul of
the party was accustomed to attend binges at the Casino in the ordinary
evening-wear trouserings topped to the north by a white mess-jacket
with brass buttons. And ever since I had stepped aboard the Blue Train
at Cannes station, I had been wondering on and off how mine would go
with Jeeves.

In the matter of evening costume, you see, Jeeves is hidebound and
reactionary. I had had trouble with him before about soft-bosomed
shirts. And while these mess-jackets had, as I say, been all the
rage--_tout ce qu’il y a de chic_--on the Côte d’Azur, I had never
concealed it from myself, even when treading the measure at the Palm
Beach Casino in the one I had hastened to buy, that there might be
something of an upheaval about it on my return.

I prepared to be firm.

“Yes, Jeeves?” I said. And though my voice was suave, a close observer
in a position to watch my eyes would have noticed a steely glint.
Nobody has a greater respect for Jeeves’s intellect than I have, but
this disposition of his to dictate to the hand that fed him had got, I
felt, to be checked. This mess-jacket was very near to my heart, and I
jolly well intended to fight for it with all the vim of grand old Sieur
de Wooster at the Battle of Agincourt.

“Yes, Jeeves?” I said. “Something on your mind, Jeeves?”

“I fear that you inadvertently left Cannes in the possession of a coat
belonging to some other gentleman, sir.”

I switched on the steely a bit more.

“No, Jeeves,” I said, in a level tone, “the object under advisement is
mine. I bought it out there.”

“You wore it, sir?”

“Every night.”

“But surely you are not proposing to wear it in England, sir?”

I saw that we had arrived at the nub.

“Yes, Jeeves.”

“But, sir----”

“You were saying, Jeeves?”

“It is quite unsuitable, sir.”

“I do not agree with you, Jeeves. I anticipate a great popular success
for this jacket. It is my intention to spring it on the public tomorrow
at Pongo Twistleton’s birthday party, where I confidently expect it
to be one long scream from start to finish. No argument, Jeeves. No
discussion. Whatever fantastic objection you may have taken to it, I
wear this jacket.”

“Very good, sir.”

He went on with his unpacking. I said no more on the subject. I had
won the victory, and we Woosters do not triumph over a beaten foe.
Presently, having completed my toilet, I bade the man a cheery farewell
and in generous mood suggested that, as I was dining out, why didn’t
he take the evening off and go to some improving picture or something.
Sort of olive branch, if you see what I mean.

He didn’t seem to think much of it.

“Thank you, sir, I will remain in.”

I surveyed him narrowly.

“Is this dudgeon, Jeeves?”

“No, sir, I am obliged to remain on the premises. Mr. Fink-Nottle
informed me he would be calling to see me this evening.”

“Oh, Gussie’s coming, is he? Well, give him my love.”

“Very good, sir.”

“Yes, sir.”

“And a whisky and soda, and so forth.”

“Very good, sir.”

“Right ho, Jeeves.”

I then set off for the Drones.

At the Drones I ran into Pongo Twistleton, and he talked so much about
this forthcoming merry-making of his, of which good reports had already
reached me through my correspondents, that it was nearing eleven when I
got home again.

And scarcely had I opened the door when I heard voices in the
sitting-room, and scarcely had I entered the sitting-room when I found
that these proceeded from Jeeves and what appeared at first sight to be
the Devil.

A closer scrutiny informed me that it was Gussie Fink-Nottle, dressed
as Mephistopheles.




-2-


“What-ho, Gussie,” I said.

You couldn’t have told it from my manner, but I was feeling more than a
bit nonplussed. The spectacle before me was enough to nonplus anyone.
I mean to say, this Fink-Nottle, as I remembered him, was the sort of
shy, shrinking goop who might have been expected to shake like an aspen
if invited to so much as a social Saturday afternoon at the vicarage.
And yet here he was, if one could credit one’s senses, about to take
part in a fancy-dress ball, a form of entertainment notoriously a
testing experience for the toughest.

And he was attending that fancy-dress ball, mark you--not, like every
other well-bred Englishman, as a Pierrot, but as Mephistopheles--this
involving, as I need scarcely stress, not only scarlet tights but a
pretty frightful false beard.

Rummy, you’ll admit. However, one masks one’s feelings. I betrayed no
vulgar astonishment, but, as I say, what-hoed with civil nonchalance.

He grinned through the fungus--rather sheepishly, I thought.

“Oh, hullo, Bertie.”

“Long time since I saw you. Have a spot?”

“No, thanks. I must be off in a minute. I just came round to ask Jeeves
how he thought I looked. How do you think I look, Bertie?”

Well, the answer to that, of course, was “perfectly foul”. But we
Woosters are men of tact and have a nice sense of the obligations of a
host. We do not tell old friends beneath our roof-tree that they are an
offence to the eyesight. I evaded the question.

“I hear you’re in London,” I said carelessly.

“Oh, yes.”

“Must be years since you came up.”

“Oh, yes.”

“And now you’re off for an evening’s pleasure.”

He shuddered a bit. He had, I noticed, a hunted air.

“Pleasure!”

“Aren’t you looking forward to this rout or revel?”

“Oh, I suppose it’ll be all right,” he said, in a toneless voice.
“Anyway, I ought to be off, I suppose. The thing starts round about
eleven. I told my cab to wait.... Will you see if it’s there, Jeeves?”

“Very good, sir.”

There was something of a pause after the door had closed. A certain
constraint. I mixed myself a beaker, while Gussie, a glutton for
punishment, stared at himself in the mirror. Finally I decided that it
would be best to let him know that I was abreast of his affairs. It
might be that it would ease his mind to confide in a sympathetic man
of experience. I have generally found, with those under the influence,
that what they want more than anything is the listening ear.

“Well, Gussie, old leper,” I said, “I’ve been hearing all about you.”

“Eh?”

“This little trouble of yours. Jeeves has told me everything.”

He didn’t seem any too braced. It’s always difficult to be sure, of
course, when a chap has dug himself in behind a Mephistopheles beard,
but I fancy he flushed a trifle.

“I wish Jeeves wouldn’t go gassing all over the place. It was supposed
to be confidential.”

I could not permit this tone.

“Dishing up the dirt to the young master can scarcely be described as
gassing all over the place,” I said, with a touch of rebuke. “Anyway,
there it is. I know all. And I should like to begin,” I said, sinking
my personal opinion that the female in question was a sloppy pest in
my desire to buck and encourage, “by saying that Madeline Bassett is a
charming girl. A winner, and just the sort for you.”

“You don’t know her?”

“Certainly I know her. What beats me is how you ever got in touch.
Where did you meet?”

“She was staying at a place near mine in Lincolnshire the week before
last.”

“Yes, but even so. I didn’t know you called on the neighbours.”

“I don’t. I met her out for a walk with her dog. The dog had got a
thorn in its foot, and when she tried to take it out, it snapped at
her. So, of course, I had to rally round.”

“You extracted the thorn?”

“Yes.”

“And fell in love at first sight?”

“Yes.”

“Well, dash it, with a thing like that to give you a send-off, why
didn’t you cash in immediately?”

“I hadn’t the nerve.”

“What happened?”

“We talked for a bit.”

“What about?”

“Oh, birds.”

“Birds? What birds?”

“The birds that happened to be hanging round. And the scenery, and all
that sort of thing. And she said she was going to London, and asked me
to look her up if I was ever there.”

“And even after that you didn’t so much as press her hand?”

“Of course not.”

Well, I mean, it looked as though there was no more to be said. If
a chap is such a rabbit that he can’t get action when he’s handed
the thing on a plate, his case would appear to be pretty hopeless.
Nevertheless, I reminded myself that this non-starter and I had been at
school together. One must make an effort for an old school friend.

“Ah, well,” I said, “we must see what can be done. Things may brighten.
At any rate, you will be glad to learn that I am behind you in this
enterprise. You have Bertram Wooster in your corner, Gussie.”

“Thanks, old man. And Jeeves, of course, which is the thing that really
matters.”

I don’t mind admitting that I winced. He meant no harm, I suppose, but
I’m bound to say that this tactless speech nettled me not a little.
People are always nettling me like that. Giving me to understand, I
mean to say, that in their opinion Bertram Wooster is a mere cipher
and that the only member of the household with brains and resources is
Jeeves.

It jars on me.

And tonight it jarred on me more than usual, because I was feeling
pretty dashed fed with Jeeves. Over that matter of the mess jacket, I
mean. True, I had forced him to climb down, quelling him, as described,
with the quiet strength of my personality, but I was still a trifle
shirty at his having brought the thing up at all. It seemed to me that
what Jeeves wanted was the iron hand.

“And what is he doing about it?” I inquired stiffly.

“He’s been giving the position of affairs a lot of thought.”

“He has, has he?”

“It’s on his advice that I’m going to this dance.”

“Why?”

“She is going to be there. In fact, it was she who sent me the ticket
of invitation. And Jeeves considered----”

“And why not as a Pierrot?” I said, taking up the point which had
struck me before. “Why this break with a grand old tradition?”

“He particularly wanted me to go as Mephistopheles.”

I started.

“He did, did he? He specifically recommended that definite costume?”

“Yes.”

“Ha!”

“Eh?”

“Nothing. Just ‘Ha!’”

And I’ll tell you why I said “Ha!” Here was Jeeves making heavy weather
about me wearing a perfectly ordinary white mess jacket, a garment not
only _tout ce qu’il y a de chic_, but absolutely _de rigueur_, and in
the same breath, as you might say, inciting Gussie Fink-Nottle to be a
blot on the London scene in scarlet tights. Ironical, what? One looks
askance at this sort of in-and-out running.

“What has he got against Pierrots?”

“I don’t think he objects to Pierrots as Pierrots. But in my case he
thought a Pierrot wouldn’t be adequate.”

“I don’t follow that.”

“He said that the costume of Pierrot, while pleasing to the eye, lacked
the authority of the Mephistopheles costume.”

“I still don’t get it.”

“Well, it’s a matter of psychology, he said.”

There was a time when a remark like that would have had me snookered.
But long association with Jeeves has developed the Wooster vocabulary
considerably. Jeeves has always been a whale for the psychology of the
individual, and I now follow him like a bloodhound when he snaps it out
of the bag.

“Oh, psychology?”

“Yes. Jeeves is a great believer in the moral effect of clothes. He
thinks I might be emboldened in a striking costume like this. He said
a Pirate Chief would be just as good. In fact, a Pirate Chief was his
first suggestion, but I objected to the boots.”

I saw his point. There is enough sadness in life without having fellows
like Gussie Fink-Nottle going about in sea boots.

“And are you emboldened?”

“Well, to be absolutely accurate, Bertie, old man, no.”

A gust of compassion shook me. After all, though we had lost touch a
bit of recent years, this man and I had once thrown inked darts at each
other.

“Gussie,” I said, “take an old friend’s advice, and don’t go within a
mile of this binge.”

“But it’s my last chance of seeing her. She’s off tomorrow to stay with
some people in the country. Besides, you don’t know.”

“Don’t know what?”

“That this idea of Jeeves’s won’t work. I feel a most frightful chump
now, yes, but who can say whether that will not pass off when I get
into a mob of other people in fancy dress. I had the same experience
as a child, one year during the Christmas festivities. They dressed me
up as a rabbit, and the shame was indescribable. Yet when I got to the
party and found myself surrounded by scores of other children, many
in costumes even ghastlier than my own, I perked up amazingly, joined
freely in the revels, and was able to eat so hearty a supper that I was
sick twice in the cab coming home. What I mean is, you can’t tell in
cold blood.”

I weighed this. It was specious, of course.

“And you can’t get away from it that, fundamentally, Jeeves’s idea is
sound. In a striking costume like Mephistopheles, I might quite easily
pull off something pretty impressive. Colour does make a difference.
Look at newts. During the courting season the male newt is brilliantly
coloured. It helps him a lot.”

“But you aren’t a male newt.”

“I wish I were. Do you know how a male newt proposes, Bertie? He just
stands in front of the female newt vibrating his tail and bending his
body in a semi-circle. I could do that on my head. No, you wouldn’t
find me grousing if I were a male newt.”

“But if you were a male newt, Madeline Bassett wouldn’t look at you.
Not with the eye of love, I mean.”

“She would, if she were a female newt.”

“But she isn’t a female newt.”

“No, but suppose she was.”

“Well, if she was, you wouldn’t be in love with her.”

“Yes, I would, if I were a male newt.”

A slight throbbing about the temples told me that this discussion had
reached saturation point.

“Well, anyway,” I said, “coming down to hard facts and cutting out all
this visionary stuff about vibrating tails and what not, the salient
point that emerges is that you are booked to appear at a fancy-dress
ball. And I tell you out of my riper knowledge of fancy-dress balls,
Gussie, that you won’t enjoy yourself.”

“It isn’t a question of enjoying yourself.”

“I wouldn’t go.”

“I must go. I keep telling you she’s off to the country tomorrow.”

I gave it up.

“So be it,” I said. “Have it your own way.... Yes, Jeeves?”

“Mr. Fink-Nottle’s cab, sir.”

“Ah? The cab, eh?... Your cab, Gussie.”

“Oh, the cab? Oh, right. Of course, yes, rather.... Thanks, Jeeves ...
Well, so long, Bertie.”

And giving me the sort of weak smile Roman gladiators used to give the
Emperor before entering the arena, Gussie trickled off. And I turned to
Jeeves. The moment had arrived for putting him in his place, and I was
all for it.

It was a little difficult to know how to begin, of course. I mean to
say, while firmly resolved to tick him off, I didn’t want to gash his
feelings too deeply. Even when displaying the iron hand, we Woosters
like to keep the thing fairly matey.

However, on consideration, I saw that there was nothing to be gained by
trying to lead up to it gently. It is never any use beating about the b.

“Jeeves,” I said, “may I speak frankly?”

“Certainly, sir.”

“What I have to say may wound you.”

“Not at all, sir.”

“Well, then, I have been having a chat with Mr. Fink-Nottle, and he has
been telling me about this Mephistopheles scheme of yours.”

“Yes, sir?”

“Now let me get it straight. If I follow your reasoning correctly,
you think that, stimulated by being upholstered throughout in scarlet
tights, Mr. Fink-Nottle, on encountering the adored object, will
vibrate his tail and generally let himself go with a whoop.”

“I am of opinion that he will lose much of his normal diffidence, sir.”

“I don’t agree with you, Jeeves.”

“No, sir?”

“No. In fact, not to put too fine a point upon it, I consider that of
all the dashed silly, drivelling ideas I ever heard in my puff this
is the most blithering and futile. It won’t work. Not a chance. All
you have done is to subject Mr. Fink-Nottle to the nameless horrors
of a fancy-dress ball for nothing. And this is not the first time
this sort of thing has happened. To be quite candid, Jeeves, I have
frequently noticed before now a tendency or disposition on your part to
become--what’s the word?”

“I could not say, sir.”

“Eloquent? No, it’s not eloquent. Elusive? No, it’s not elusive. It’s
on the tip of my tongue. Begins with an ‘e’ and means being a jolly
sight too clever.”

“Elaborate, sir?”

“That is the exact word I was after. Too elaborate, Jeeves--that is
what you are frequently prone to become. Your methods are not simple,
not straightforward. You cloud the issue with a lot of fancy stuff that
is not of the essence. All that Gussie needs is the elder-brotherly
advice of a seasoned man of the world. So what I suggest is that from
now onward you leave this case to me.”

“Very good, sir.”

“You lay off and devote yourself to your duties about the home.”

“Very good, sir.”

“I shall no doubt think of something quite simple and straightforward
yet perfectly effective ere long. I will make a point of seeing Gussie
tomorrow.”

“Very good, sir.”

“Right ho, Jeeves.”

But on the morrow all those telegrams started coming in, and I confess
that for twenty-four hours I didn’t give the poor chap a thought,
having problems of my own to contend with.




-3-


The first of the telegrams arrived shortly after noon, and Jeeves
brought it in with the before-luncheon snifter. It was from my Aunt
