The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Enchanted April
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Enchanted April

Author: Elizabeth Von Arnim

Release date: July 29, 2005 [eBook #16389]
                Most recently updated: June 25, 2023

Language: English

Credits: Manette Rothermel


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENCHANTED APRIL ***




[Illustration]




The Enchanted April

by Elizabeth Von Arnim




Contents

 Chapter 1
 Chapter 2
 Chapter 3
 Chapter 4
 Chapter 5
 Chapter 6
 Chapter 7
 Chapter 8
 Chapter 9
 Chapter 10
 Chapter 11
 Chapter 12
 Chapter 13
 Chapter 14
 Chapter 15
 Chapter 16
 Chapter 17
 Chapter 18
 Chapter 19
 Chapter 20
 Chapter 21
 Chapter 22




Chapter 1


It began in a Woman’s Club in London on a February afternoon—an
uncomfortable club, and a miserable afternoon—when Mrs. Wilkins, who
had come down from Hampstead to shop and had lunched at her club, took
up _The Times_ from the table in the smoking-room, and running her
listless eye down the Agony Column saw this:

  To Those who Appreciate Wistaria and Sunshine. Small mediaeval
    Italian Castle on the shores of the Mediterranean to be Let
    Furnished for the month of April. Necessary servants remain. Z,
    Box 1000, _The Times_.

That was its conception; yet, as in the case of many another, the
conceiver was unaware of it at the moment.

So entirely unaware was Mrs. Wilkins that her April for that year had
then and there been settled for her that she dropped the newspaper with
a gesture that was both irritated and resigned, and went over to the
window and stared drearily out at the dripping street.

Not for her were mediaeval castles, even those that are specially
described as small. Not for her the shores in April of the
Mediterranean, and the wistaria and sunshine. Such delights were only
for the rich. Yet the advertisement had been addressed to persons who
appreciate these things, so that it had been, anyhow, addressed too
to her, for she certainly appreciated them; more than anybody knew;
more than she had ever told. But she was poor. In the whole world she
possessed of her very own only ninety pounds, saved from year to year,
put by carefully pound by pound, out of her dress allowance. She had
scraped this sum together at the suggestion of her husband as a shield
and refuge against a rainy day. Her dress allowance, given her by her
father, was £100 a year, so that Mrs. Wilkins’s clothes were what
her husband, urging her to save, called modest and becoming, and her
acquaintance to each other, when they spoke of her at all, which was
seldom for she was very negligible, called a perfect sight.

Mr. Wilkins, a solicitor, encouraged thrift, except that branch of it
which got into his food. He did not call that thrift, he called it bad
housekeeping. But for the thrift which, like moth, penetrated into Mrs.
Wilkins’s clothes and spoilt them, he had much praise. “You never
know,” he said, “when there will be a rainy day, and you may be very
glad to find you have a nest-egg. Indeed we both may.”

Looking out of the club window into Shaftesbury Avenue—hers was an
economical club, but convenient for Hampstead, where she lived, and for
Shoolbred’s, where she shopped—Mrs. Wilkins, having stood there some
time very drearily, her mind’s eye on the Mediterranean in April, and
the wistaria, and the enviable opportunities of the rich, while her
bodily eye watched the really extremely horrible sooty rain falling
steadily on the hurrying umbrellas and splashing omnibuses, suddenly
wondered whether perhaps this was not the rainy day Mellersh—Mellersh
was Mr. Wilkins—had so often encouraged her to prepare for, and whether
to get out of such a climate and into the small mediaeval castle wasn’t
perhaps what Providence had all along intended her to do with her
savings. Part of her savings, of course; perhaps quite a small part.
The castle, being mediaeval, might also be dilapidated, and
dilapidations were surely cheap. She wouldn’t in the least mind a few
of them, because you didn’t pay for dilapidations which were already
there; on the contrary—by reducing the price you had to pay they really
paid you. But what nonsense to think of it . . .

She turned away from the window with the same gesture of mingled
irritation and resignation with which she had laid down _The Times_,
and crossed the room towards the door with the intention of getting her
mackintosh and umbrella and fighting her way into one of the
overcrowded omnibuses and going to Shoolbred’s on her way home and
buying some soles for Mellersh’s dinner—Mellersh was difficult with
fish and liked only soles, except salmon—when she beheld Mrs.
Arbuthnot, a woman she knew by sight as also living in Hampstead and
belonging to the club, sitting at the table in the middle of the room
on which the newspapers and magazines were kept, absorbed, in her turn,
in the first page of _The Times_.

Mrs. Wilkins had never yet spoken to Mrs. Arbuthnot, who belonged to
one of the various church sets, and who analysed, classified, divided
and registered the poor; whereas she and Mellersh, when they did go
out, went to the parties of impressionist painters, of whom in
Hampstead there were many. Mellersh had a sister who had married one of
them and lived up on the Heath, and because of this alliance Mrs.
Wilkins was drawn into a circle which was highly unnatural to her, and
she had learned to dread pictures. She had to say things about them,
and she didn’t know what to say. She used to murmur, “Marvellous,” and
feel that it was not enough. But nobody minded. Nobody listened. Nobody
took any notice of Mrs. Wilkins. She was the kind of person who is not
noticed at parties. Her clothes, infested by thrift, made her
practically invisible; her face was non-arresting; her conversation was
reluctant; she was shy. And if one’s clothes and face and conversation
are all negligible, thought Mrs. Wilkins, who recognised her
disabilities, what, at parties, is there left of one?

Also she was always with Wilkins, that clean-shaven, fine-looking man,
who gave a party, merely by coming to it, a great air. Wilkins was
very respectable. He was known to be highly thought of by his senior
partners. His sister’s circle admired him. He pronounced adequately
intelligent judgments on art and artists. He was pithy; he was prudent;
he never said a word too much, nor, on the other hand, did he ever
say a word too little. He produced the impression of keeping copies
of everything he said; and he was so obviously reliable that it often
happened that people who met him at these parties became discontented
with their own solicitors, and after a period of restlessness
extricated themselves and went to Wilkins.

Naturally Mrs. Wilkins was blotted out. “She,” said his sister, with
something herself of the judicial, the digested, and the final in her
manner, “should stay at home.” But Wilkins could not leave his wife at
home. He was a family solicitor, and all such have wives and show them.
With his in the week he went to parties, and with his on Sundays he
went to church. Being still fairly young—he was thirty-nine—and
ambitious of old ladies, of whom he had not yet acquired in his
practice a sufficient number, he could not afford to miss church, and
it was there that Mrs. Wilkins became familiar, though never through
words, with Mrs. Arbuthnot.

She saw her marshalling the children of the poor into pews. She would
come in at the head of the procession from the Sunday School exactly
five minutes before the choir, and get her boys and girls neatly fitted
into their allotted seats, and down on their little knees in their
preliminary prayer, and up again on their feet just as, to the swelling
organ, the vestry door opened, and the choir and clergy, big with the
litanies and commandments they were presently to roll out, emerged. She
had a sad face, yet she was evidently efficient. The combination used
to make Mrs. Wilkins wonder, for she had been told by Mellersh, on days
when she had only been able to get plaice, that if one were efficient
one wouldn’t be depressed, and that if one does one’s job well one
becomes automatically bright and brisk.

About Mrs. Arbuthnot there was nothing bright and brisk, though much in
her way with the Sunday School children that was automatic; but when
Mrs. Wilkins, turning from the window, caught sight of her in the club
she was not being automatic at all, but was looking fixedly at one
portion of the first page of _The Times_, holding the paper quite
still, her eyes not moving. She was just staring; and her face, as
usual, was the face of a patient and disappointed Madonna.

Obeying an impulse she wondered at even while obeying it, Mrs. Wilkins,
the shy and the reluctant, instead of proceeding as she had intended to
the cloakroom and from thence to Schoolbred’s in search of Mellersh’s
fish, stopped at the table and sat down exactly opposite Mrs.
Arbuthnot, to whom she had never yet spoken in her life.

It was one of those long, narrow refectory tables, so that they were
quite close to each other.

Mrs. Arbuthnot, however, did not look up. She continued to gaze, with
eyes that seemed to be dreaming, at one spot only of The Times.

Mrs. Wilkins watched her a minute, trying to screw up courage to speak
to her. She wanted to ask her if she had seen the advertisement. She
did not know why she wanted to ask her this, but she wanted to. How
stupid not to be able to speak to her. She looked so kind. She looked
so unhappy. Why couldn’t two unhappy people refresh each other on their
way through this dusty business of life by a little talk—real, natural
talk, about what they felt, what they would have liked, what they still
tried to hope? And she could not help thinking that Mrs. Arbuthnot,
too, was reading that very same advertisement. Her eyes were on the
very part of the paper. Was she, too, picturing what it would be
like—the colour, the fragrance, the light, the soft lapping of the sea
among little hot rocks? Colour, fragrance, light, sea; instead of
Shaftesbury Avenue, and the wet omnibuses, and the fish department at
Shoolbred’s, and the Tube to Hampstead, and dinner, and to-morrow the
same and the day after the same and always the same . . .

Suddenly Mrs. Wilkins found herself leaning across the table. “Are you
reading about the mediaeval castle and the wistaria?” she heard herself
asking.

Naturally Mrs. Arbuthnot was surprised; but she was not half so much
surprised as Mrs. Wilkins was at herself for asking.

Mrs. Arbuthnot had not yet to her knowledge set eyes on the shabby,
lank, loosely-put-together figure sitting opposite her, with its small
freckled face and big grey eyes almost disappearing under a
smashed-down wet-weather hat, and she gazed at her a moment without
answering. She _was_ reading about the mediaeval castle and the
wistaria, or rather had read about it ten minutes before, and since
then had been lost in dreams—of light, of colour, of fragrance, of the
soft lapping of the sea among little hot rocks . . .

“Why do you ask me that?” she said in her grave voice, for her training
of and by the poor had made her grave and patient.

Mrs. Wilkins flushed and looked excessively shy and frightened. “Oh,
only because I saw it too, and I thought perhaps—I thought somehow—”
she stammered.

Whereupon Mrs. Arbuthnot, her mind being used to getting people into
lists and divisions, from habit considered, as she gazed thoughtfully
at Mrs. Wilkins, under what heading, supposing she had to classify her,
she could most properly be put.

“And I know you by sight,” went on Mrs. Wilkins, who, like all the shy,
once she was started plunged on, frightening herself to more and more
speech by the sheer sound of what she had said last in her ears. “Every
Sunday—I see you every Sunday in church—”

“In church?” echoed Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“And this seems such a wonderful thing—this advertisement about the
wistaria—and—”

Mrs. Wilkins, who must have been at least thirty, broke off and
wriggled in her chair with the movement of an awkward and embarrassed
schoolgirl.

“It seems _so_ wonderful,” she went on in a kind of burst, “and—it is
such a miserable day . . .”

And then she sat looking at Mrs. Arbuthnot with the eyes of an
imprisoned dog.

“This poor thing,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose life was spent in
helping and alleviating, “needs advice.”

She accordingly prepared herself patiently to give it.

“If you see me in church,” she said, kindly and attentively, “I suppose
you live in Hampstead too?”

“Oh yes,” said Mrs. Wilkins. And she repeated, her head on its long
thin neck drooping a little as if the recollection of Hampstead bowed
her, “Oh yes.”

“Where?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, who, when advice was needed, naturally
first proceeded to collect the facts.

But Mrs. Wilkins, laying her hand softly and caressingly on the part
of _The Times_ where the advertisement was, as though the mere printed
words of it were precious, only said, “Perhaps that’s why _this_ seems
so wonderful.”

“No—I think _that’s_ wonderful anyhow,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, forgetting
facts and faintly sighing.

“Then you _were_ reading it?”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, her eyes going dreamy again.

“Wouldn’t it be wonderful?” murmured Mrs. Wilkins.

“Wonderful,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot. Her face, which had lit up, faded
into patience again. “Very wonderful,” she said. “But it’s no use
wasting one’s time thinking of such things.”

“Oh, but it _is_,” was Mrs. Wilkins’s quick, surprising reply;
surprising because it was so much unlike the rest of her—the
characterless coat and skirt, the crumpled hat, the undecided wisp of
hair straggling out. “And just the considering of them is worth while
in itself—such a change from Hampstead—and sometimes I believe—I really
do believe—if one considers hard enough one gets things.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot observed her patiently. In what category would she,
supposing she had to, put her?

“Perhaps,” she said, leaning forward a little, “you will tell me your
name. If we are to be friends”—she smiled her grave smile—“as I hope we
are, we had better begin at the beginning.”

“Oh yes—how kind of you. I’m Mrs. Wilkins,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “I don’t
expect,” she added, flushing, as Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing, “that it
conveys anything to you. Sometimes it—it doesn’t seem to convey
anything to me either. But”—she looked round with a movement of seeking
help—“I _am_ Mrs. Wilkins.”

She did not like her name. It was a mean, small name, with a kind of
facetious twist, she thought, about its end like the upward curve of a
pugdog’s tail. There it was, however. There was no doing anything with
it. Wilkins she was and Wilkins she would remain; and though her
husband encouraged her to give it on all occasions as Mrs.
Mellersh-Wilkins she only did that when he was within earshot, for she
thought Mellersh made Wilkins worse, emphasising it in the way
Chatsworth on the gate-posts of a villa emphasises the villa.

When first he suggested she should add Mellersh she had objected for
the above reason, and after a pause—Mellersh was much too prudent to
speak except after a pause, during which presumably he was taking a
careful mental copy of his coming observation—he said, much displeased,
“But I am not a villa,” and looked at her as he looks who hopes, for
perhaps the hundredth time, that he may not have married a fool.

Of course he was not a villa, Mrs. Wilkins assured him; she had never
supposed he was; she had not dreamed of meaning . . . she was only just
thinking . . .

The more she explained the more earnest became Mellersh’s hope,
familiar to him by this time, for he had then been a husband for two
years, that he might not by any chance have married a fool; and they
had a prolonged quarrel, if that can be called a quarrel which is
conducted with dignified silence on one side and earnest apology on the
other, as to whether or no Mrs. Wilkins had intended to suggest that
Mr. Wilkins was a villa.

“I believe,” she had thought when it was at last over—it took a long
while—“that _anybody_ would quarrel about _anything_ when they’ve not
left off being together for a single day for two whole years. What we
both need is a holiday.”

“My husband,” went on Mrs. Wilkins to Mrs. Arbuthnot, trying to throw
some light on herself, “is a solicitor. He—” She cast about for
something she could say elucidatory of Mellersh, and found: “He’s very
handsome.”

“Well,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot kindly, “that must be a great pleasure to
you.”

“Why?” asked Mrs. Wilkins.

“Because,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, a little taken aback, for constant
intercourse with the poor had accustomed her to have her pronouncements
accepted without question, “because beauty—handsomeness—is a gift like
any other, and if it is properly used—”

She trailed off into silence. Mrs. Wilkins’s great grey eyes were fixed
on her, and it seemed suddenly to Mrs. Arbuthnot that perhaps she was
becoming crystallised into a habit of exposition, and of exposition
after the manner of nursemaids, through having an audience that
couldn’t but agree, that would be afraid, if it wished, to interrupt,
that didn’t know, that was, in fact, at her mercy.

But Mrs. Wilkins was not listening; for just then, absurd as it seemed,
a picture had flashed across her brain, and there were two figures in
it sitting together under a great trailing wistaria that stretched
across the branches of a tree she didn’t know, and it was herself and
Mrs. Arbuthnot—she saw them—she saw them. And behind them, bright in
sunshine, were old grey walls—the mediaeval castle—she saw it—they
were there . . .

She therefore stared at Mrs. Arbuthnot and did not hear a word she
said. And Mrs. Arbuthnot stared too at Mrs. Wilkins, arrested by the
expression on her face, which was swept by the excitement of what she
saw, and was as luminous and tremulous under it as water in sunlight
when it is ruffled by a gust of wind. At this moment, if she had been
at a party, Mrs. Wilkins would have been looked at with interest.

They stared at each other; Mrs. Arbuthnot surprised, inquiringly, Mrs.
Wilkins with the eyes of some one who has had a revelation. Of course.
That was how it could be done. She herself, she by herself, couldn’t
afford it, and wouldn’t be able, even if she could afford it, to go
there all alone; but she and Mrs. Arbuthnot together . . .

She leaned across the table. “Why don’t we try and get it?” she
whispered.

Mrs. Arbuthnot became even more wide-eyed. “Get it?” she repeated.

“Yes,” said Mrs. Wilkins, still as though she were afraid of being
overheard. “Not just sit here and say How wonderful, and then go home
to Hampstead without having put out a finger—go home just as usual and
see about the dinner and the fish just as we’ve been doing for years
and years and will go on doing for years and years. In fact,” said Mrs.
Wilkins, flushing to the roots of her hair, for the sound of what she
was saying, of what was coming pouring out, frightened her, and yet she
couldn’t stop, “I see no end to it. There is no end to it. So that
there ought to be a break, there ought to be intervals—in everybody’s
interests. Why, it would really be being unselfish to go away and be
happy for a little, because we would come back so much nicer. You see,
after a bit everybody needs a holiday.”

“But—how do you mean, get it?” asked Mrs. Arbuthnot.

“Take it,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

“Take it?”

“Rent it. Hire it. Have it.”

“But—do you mean you and I?”

“Yes. Between us. Share. Then it would only cost half, and you look
so—you look exactly as if you wanted it just as much as I do—as if you
ought to have a rest—have something happy happen to you.”

“Why, but we don’t know each other.”

“But just think how well we would if we went away together for a month!
And I’ve saved for a rainy day, and I expect so have you, and this _is_
the rainy day—look at it—”

“She is unbalanced,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot; yet she felt strangely
stirred.

“Think of getting away for a whole month—from everything—to heaven—”

“She shouldn’t say things like that,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. “The
vicar—” Yet she felt strangely stirred. It would indeed be wonderful to
have a rest, a cessation.

Habit, however, steadied her again; and years of intercourse with the
poor made her say, with the slight though sympathetic superiority of
the explainer, “But then, you see, heaven isn’t somewhere else. It is
here and now. We are told so.”

She became very earnest, just as she did when trying patiently to help
and enlighten the poor. “Heaven is within us,” she said in her gentle
low voice. “We are told that on the very highest authority. And you
know the lines about the kindred points, don’t you—”

“Oh yes, I know _them_,” interrupted Mrs. Wilkins impatiently.

“The kindred points of heaven and home,” continued Mrs. Arbuthnot, who
was used to finishing her sentences. “Heaven is in our home.”

“It isn’t,” said Mrs. Wilkins, again surprisingly.

Mrs. Arbuthnot was taken aback. Then she said gently, “Oh, but it is.
It is there if we choose, if we make it.”

“I do choose, and I do make it, and it isn’t,” said Mrs. Wilkins.

Then Mrs. Arbuthnot was silent, for she too sometimes had doubts about
homes. She sat and looked uneasily at Mrs. Wilkins, feeling more and
more the urgent need to getting her classified. If she could only
classify Mrs. Wilkins, get her safely under her proper heading, she
felt that she herself would regain her balance, which did seem very
strangely to be slipping all to one side. For neither had she had a
holiday for years, and the advertisement when she saw it had set her
dreaming, and Mrs. Wilkins’s excitement about it was infectious, and
she had the sensation, as she listened to her impetuous, odd talk and
watched her lit-up face, that she was being stirred out of sleep.

Clearly Mrs. Wilkins was unbalanced, but Mrs. Arbuthnot had met the
unbalanced before—indeed she was always meeting them—and they had no
effect on her own stability at all; whereas this one was making her
feel quite wobbly, quite as though to be off and away, away from her
compass points of God, Husband, Home and Duty—she didn’t feel as if
Mrs. Wilkins intended Mr. Wilkins to come too—and just for once be
happy, would be both good and desirable. Which of course it wasn’t;
which certainly of course it wasn’t. She, also, had a nest-egg,
invested gradually in the Post Office Savings Bank, but to suppose that
she would ever forget her duty to the extent of drawing it out and
spending it on herself was surely absurd. Surely she couldn’t, she
wouldn’t ever do such a thing? Surely she wouldn’t, she couldn’t ever
forget her poor, forget misery and sickness as completely as that? No
doubt a trip to Italy would be extraordinarily delightful, but there
were many delightful things one would like to do, and what was strength
given to one for except to help one not to do them?

Steadfast as the points of the compass to Mrs. Arbuthnot were the great
four facts of life: God, Husband, Home, Duty. She had gone to sleep on
these facts years ago, after a period of much misery, her head resting
on them as on a pillow; and she had a great dread of being awakened out
of so simple and untroublesome a condition. Therefore it was that she
searched with earnestness for a heading under which to put Mrs.
Wilkins, and in this way illumine and steady her own mind; and sitting
there looking at her uneasily after her last remark, and feeling
herself becoming more and more unbalanced and infected, she decided
_pro tem_, as the vicar said at meetings, to put her under the heading
Nerves. It was just possible that she ought to go straight into the
category Hysteria, which was often only the antechamber to Lunacy, but
Mrs. Arbuthnot had learned not to hurry people into their final
categories, having on more than one occasion discovered with dismay
that she had made a mistake; and how difficult it had been to get them
out again, and how crushed she had been with the most terrible remorse.

Yes. Nerves. Probably she had no regular work for others, thought Mrs.
Arbuthnot; no work that would take her outside herself. Evidently she
was rudderless—blown about by gusts, by impulses. Nerves was almost
certainly her category, or would be quite soon if no one helped her.
Poor little thing, thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, her own balance returning
hand in hand with her compassion, and unable, because of the table,
to see the length of Mrs. Wilkins’s legs. All she saw was her small,
eager, shy face, and her thin shoulders, and the look of childish
longing in her eyes for something that she was sure was going to make
her happy. No; such things didn’t make people happy, such fleeting
things. Mrs. Arbuthnot had learned in her long life with Frederick—he
was her husband, and she had married him at twenty and was now
thirty-three—where alone true joys are to be found. They are to be
found, she now knew, only in daily, in hourly, living for others;
they are to be found only—hadn’t she over and over again taken her
disappointments and discouragements there, and come away comforted?—at
the feet of God.

Frederick had been the kind of husband whose wife betakes herself early
to the feet of God. From him to them had been a short though painful
step. It seemed short to her in retrospect, but it had really taken the
whole of the first year of their marriage, and every inch of the way
had been a struggle, and every inch of it was stained, she felt at the
time, with her heart’s blood. All that was over now. She had long since
found peace. And Frederick, from her passionately loved bridegroom,
from her worshipped young husband, had become second only to God on
her list of duties and forbearances. There he hung, the second in
importance, a bloodless thing bled white by her prayers. For years she
had been able to be happy only by forgetting happiness. She wanted to
stay like that. She wanted to shut out everything that would remind her
of beautiful things, that might set her off again longing, desiring....

“I’d like so much to be friends,” she said earnestly. “Won’t you come
and see me, or let me come to you sometimes? Whenever you feel as if
you wanted to talk. I’ll give you my address”—she searched in her
handbag—“and then you won’t forget.” And she found a card and held it
out.

Mrs. Wilkins ignored the card.

“It’s so funny,” said Mrs. Wilkins, just as if she had not heard her,
“but I _see_ us both—you and me—this April in the mediaeval castle.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot relapsed into uneasiness. “Do you?” she said, making an
effort to stay balanced under the visionary gaze of the shining grey
eyes. “Do you?”

“Don’t you ever see things in a kind of flash before they happen?”
asked Mrs. Wilkins.

“Never,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot.

She tried to smile; she tried to smile the sympathetic yet wise
and tolerant smile with which she was accustomed to listen to the
necessarily biassed and incomplete views of the poor. She didn’t
succeed. The smile trembled out.

“Of course,” she said in a low voice, almost as if she were afraid the
vicar and the Savings Bank were listening, “it would be most
beautiful—most beautiful—”

“Even if it were wrong,” said Mrs. Wilkins, “it would only be for a
month.”

“That—” began Mrs. Arbuthnot, quite clear as to the reprehensibleness
of such a point of view; but Mrs. Wilkins stopped her before she could
finish.

“Anyhow,” said Mrs. Wilkins, stopping her, “I’m sure it’s wrong to go
on being good for too long, till one gets miserable. And I can see
you’ve been good for years and years, because you look so unhappy”—Mrs.
Arbuthnot opened her mouth to protest—“and I—I’ve done nothing but
duties, things for other people, ever since I was a girl, and I don’t
believe anybody loves me a bit—a bit—the b-better—and I long—oh, I
long—for something else—something else—”

Was she going to cry? Mrs. Arbuthnot became acutely uncomfortable and
sympathetic. She hoped she wasn’t going to cry. Not there. Not in that
unfriendly room, with strangers coming and going.

But Mrs. Wilkins, after tugging agitatedly at a handkerchief that
wouldn’t come out of her pocket, did succeed at last in merely
apparently blowing her nose with it, and then, blinking her eyes very
quickly once or twice, looked at Mrs. Arbuthnot with a quivering air of
half humble, half frightened apology, and smiled.

“Will you believe,” she whispered, trying to steady her mouth,
evidently dreadfully ashamed of herself, “that I’ve never spoken to any
one before in my life like this? I can’t think, I simply don’t know,
what has come over me.”

“It’s the advertisement,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot, nodding gravely.

“Yes,” said Mrs. Wilkins, dabbing furtively at her eyes, “and us both
being so—”—she blew her nose again a little—“miserable.”




Chapter 2


Of course Mrs. Arbuthnot was not miserable—how could she be, she asked
herself, when God was taking care of her?—but she let that pass for the
moment unrepudiated, because of her conviction that here was another
fellow-creature in urgent need of her help; and not just boots and
blankets and better sanitary arrangements this time, but the more
delicate help of comprehension, of finding the exact right words.

The exact right words, she presently discovered, after trying various
ones about living for others, and prayer, and the peace to be found in
placing oneself unreservedly in God’s hands—to meet all these words
Mrs. Wilkins had other words, incoherent and yet, for the moment at
least, till one had had more time, difficult to answer—the exact right
words were a suggestion that it would do no harm to answer the
advertisement. Non-committal. Mere inquiry. And what disturbed Mrs.
Arbuthnot about this suggestion was that she did not make it solely to
comfort Mrs. Wilkins; she made it because of her own strange longing
for the mediaeval castle.

This was very disturbing. There she was, accustomed to direct, to lead,
to advise, to support—except Frederick; she long since had learned to
leave Frederick to God—being led herself, being influenced and thrown
off her feet, by just an advertisement, by just an incoherent stranger.
It was indeed disturbing. She failed to understand her sudden longing
for what was, after all, self-indulgence, when for years no such desire
had entered her heart.

“There’s no harm in simply _asking_,” she said in a low voice, as if
the vicar and the Savings Bank and all her waiting and dependent poor
were listening and condemning.

“It isn’t as if it _committed_ us to anything,” said Mrs. Wilkins, also
in a low voice, but her voice shook.

They got up simultaneously—Mrs. Arbuthnot had a sensation of surprise
that Mrs. Wilkins should be so tall—and went to a writing-table, and
Mrs. Arbuthnot wrote to Z, Box 1000, _The Times_, for particulars. She
asked for all particulars, but the only one they really wanted was the
one about the rent. They both felt that it was Mrs. Arbuthnot who ought
to write the letter and do the business part. Not only was she used to
organising and being practical, but she also was older, and certainly
calmer; and she herself had no doubt too that she was wiser. Neither
had Mrs. Wilkins any doubt of this; the very way Mrs. Arbuthnot parted
her hair suggested a great calm that could only proceed from wisdom.

But if she was wiser, older and calmer, Mrs. Arbuthnot’s new friend
nevertheless seemed to her to be the one who impelled. Incoherent, she
yet impelled. She appeared to have, apart from her need of help, an
upsetting kind of character. She had a curious infectiousness. She led
one on. And the way her unsteady mind leaped at conclusions—wrong ones,
of course; witness the one that she, Mrs. Arbuthnot, was miserable—the
way she leaped at conclusions was disconcerting.

Whatever she was, however, and whatever her unsteadiness, Mrs.
Arbuthnot found herself sharing her excitement and her longing; and
when the letter had been posted in the letter-box in the hall and
actually was beyond getting back again, both she and Mrs. Wilkins felt
the same sense of guilt.

“It only shows,” said Mrs. Wilkins in a whisper, as they turned away
from the letter-box, “how immaculately good we’ve been all our lives.
The very first time we do anything our husbands don’t know about we
feel guilty.”

“I’m afraid I can’t say I’ve been immaculately good,” gently protested
Mrs. Arbuthnot, a little uncomfortable at this fresh example of
successful leaping at conclusions, for she had not said a word about
her feeling of guilt.

“Oh, but I’m sure you have—I _see_ you being good—and that’s why you’re
not happy.”

“She shouldn’t say things like that,” thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. “I must
try and help her not to.”

Aloud she said gravely, “I don’t know why you insist that I’m not
happy. When you know me better I think you’ll find that I am. And I’m
sure you don’t mean really that goodness, if one could attain it, makes
one unhappy.”

“Yes, I do,” said Mrs. Wilkins. “Our sort of goodness does. We have
attained it, and we are unhappy. There are miserable sorts of goodness
and happy sorts—the sort we’ll have at the mediaeval castle, for
instance, is the happy sort.”

“That is, supposing we go there,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot restrainingly.
She felt that Mrs. Wilkins needed holding on to. “After all, we’ve only
written just to ask. Anybody may do that. I think it quite likely we
shall find the conditions impossible, and even if they were not,
probably by to-morrow we shall not want to go.”

“I _see_ us there,” was Mrs. Wilkins’s answer to that.

All this was very unbalancing. Mrs. Arbuthnot, as she presently
splashed through the dripping streets on her way to a meeting she
was to speak at, was in an unusually disturbed condition of mind.
She had, she hoped, shown herself very calm to Mrs. Wilkins, very
practical and sober, concealing her own excitement. But she was really
extraordinarily moved, and she felt happy, and she felt guilty, and
she felt afraid, and she had all the feelings, though this she did
not know, of a woman who has come away from a secret meeting with
her lover. That, indeed, was what she looked like when she arrived
late on her platform; she, the open-browed, looked almost furtive as
her eyes fell on the staring wooden faces waiting to hear her try
and persuade them to contribute to the alleviation of the urgent
needs of the Hampstead poor, each one convinced that they needed
contributions themselves. She looked as though she were hiding
something discreditable but delightful. Certainly her customary clear
expression of candour was not there, and its place was taken by a
kind of suppressed and frightened pleasedness, which would have led a
more worldly-minded audience to the instant conviction of recent and
probably impassioned lovemaking.

Beauty, beauty, beauty . . . the words kept ringing in her ears as she
stood on the platform talking of sad things to the sparsely attended
meeting. She had never been to Italy. Was that really what her nest-egg
was to be spent on after all? Though she couldn’t approve of the way
Mrs. Wilkins was introducing the idea of predestination into her
immediate future, just as if she had no choice, just as if to struggle,
or even to reflect, were useless, it yet influenced her. Mrs. Wilkins’s
eyes had been the eyes of a seer. Some people were like that, Mrs.
Arbuthnot knew; and if Mrs. Wilkins had actually seen her at the
mediaeval castle it did seem probable that struggling would be a waste
of time. Still, to spend her nest-egg on self-indulgence— The origin of
this egg had been corrupt, but she had at least supposed its end was to
be creditable. Was she to deflect it from its intended destination,
which alone had appeared to justify her keeping it, and spend it on
giving herself pleasure?

Mrs. Arbuthnot spoke on and on, so much practised in the kind of speech
that she could have said it all in her sleep, and at the end of the
meeting, her eyes dazzled by her secret visions, she hardly noticed
that nobody was moved in any way whatever, least of all in the way of
contributions.

But the vicar noticed. The vicar was disappointed. Usually his good
friend and supporter Mrs. Arbuthnot succeeded better than this. And,
what was even more unusual, she appeared, he observed, not even to
mind.

“I can’t imagine,” he said to her as they parted, speaking irritably,
for he was irritated both by the audience and by her, “what these
people are coming to. _Nothing_ seems to move them.”

“Perhaps they need a holiday,” suggested Mrs. Arbuthnot; an
unsatisfactory, a queer reply, the vicar thought.

“In February?” he called after her sarcastically.

“Oh no—not till April,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot over her shoulder.

“Very odd,” thought the vicar. “Very odd indeed.” And he went home and
was not perhaps quite christian to his wife.

That night in her prayers Mrs. Arbuthnot asked for guidance. She felt
she ought really to ask, straight out and roundly, that the mediaeval
castle should already have been taken by some one else and the whole
thing thus be settled, but her courage failed her. Suppose her prayer
were to be answered? No; she couldn’t ask it; she couldn’t risk it. And
after all—she almost pointed this out to God—if she spent her present
nest-egg on a holiday she could quite soon accumulate another.
Frederick pressed money on her; and it would only mean, while she
rolled up a second egg, that for a time her contributions to the parish
charities would be less. And then it could be the next nest-egg whose
original corruption would be purged away by the use to which it was
finally put.

For Mrs. Arbuthnot, who had no money of her own, was obliged to live
on the proceeds of Frederick’s activities, and her very nest-egg was
the fruit, posthumously ripened, of ancient sin. The way Frederick made
his living was one of the standing distresses of her life. He wrote
immensely popular memoirs, regularly, every year, of the mistresses of
kings. There were in history numerous kings who had had mistresses,
and there were still more numerous mistresses who had had kings; so
that he had been able to publish a book of memoirs during each year of
his married life, and even so there were great further piles of these
ladies waiting to be dealt with. Mrs. Arbuthnot was helpless. Whether
she liked it or not, she was obliged to live on the proceeds. He gave
her a dreadful sofa once, after the success of his Du Barri memoir,
with swollen cushions and soft, receptive lap, and it seemed to her
a miserable thing that there, in her very home, should flaunt this
re-incarnation of a dead old French sinner.

Simply good, convinced that morality is the basis of happiness, the
fact that she and Frederick should draw their sustenance from guilt,
however much purged by the passage of centuries, was one of the secret
reasons of her sadness. The more the memoired lady had forgotten
herself, the more his book about her was read and the more free-handed
he was to his wife; and all that he gave her was spent, after adding
slightly to her nest-egg—for she did hope and believe that some day
people would cease to want to read of wickedness, and then Frederick
would need supporting—on helping the poor. The parish flourished
because, to take a handful at random, of the ill-behaviour of the
ladies Du Barri, Montespan, Pompadour, Ninon de l’Enclos, and even of
learned Maintenon. The poor were the filter through which the money
was passed, to come out, Mrs. Arbuthnot hoped, purified. She could do
no more. She had tried in days gone by to think the situation out, to
discover the exact right course for her to take, but had found it, as
she had found Frederick, too difficult, and had left it, as she had
left Frederick, to God. Nothing of this money was spent on her house
or dress; those remained, except for the great soft sofa, austere. It
was the poor who profited. Their very boots were stout with sins. But
how difficult it had been. Mrs. Arbuthnot, groping for guidance, prayed
about it to exhaustion. Ought she perhaps to refuse to touch the money,
to avoid it as she would have avoided the sins which were its source?
But then what about the parish’s boots? She asked the vicar what he
thought, and, through much delicate language, evasive and cautious, it
did finally appear that he was for the boots.

At least she had persuaded Frederick, when first he began his terrible
successful career—he only began it after their marriage; when she
married him he had been a blameless official attached to the library of
the British Museum—to publish the memoirs under another name, so that
she was not publicly branded. Hampstead read the books with glee, and
had no idea that their writer lived in its midst. Frederick was almost
unknown, even by sight, in Hampstead. He never went to any of its
gatherings. Whatever it was he did in the way of recreation was done in
London, but he never spoke of what he did or whom he saw; he might have
been perfectly friendless for any mention he ever made of friends to
his wife. Only the vicar knew where the money for the parish came from,
and he regarded it, he told Mrs. Arbuthnot, as a matter of honour not
to mention it.

And at least her little house was not haunted by the loose-lived
ladies, for Frederick did his work away from home. He had two rooms
near the British Museum, which was the scene of his exhumations, and
there he went every morning, and he came back long after his wife was
asleep. Sometimes he did not come back at all. Sometimes she did not
see him for several days together. Then he would suddenly appear at
breakfast, having let himself in with his latchkey the night before,
very jovial and good-natured and free-handed and glad if she would
allow him to give her something—a well-fed man, contented with the
world; a jolly, full-blooded, satisfied man. And she was always gentle,
and anxious that his coffee should be as he liked it.

He seemed very happy. Life, she often thought, however much one
tabulated was yet a mystery. There were always some people it was
impossible to place. Frederick was one of them. He didn’t seem to bear
the remotest resemblance to the original Frederick. He didn’t seem to
have the least need of any of the things he used to say were so
important and beautiful—love, home, complete communion of thoughts,
complete immersion in each other’s interests. After those early painful
attempts to hold him up to the point from which they had hand in hand
so splendidly started, attempts in which she herself had got terribly
hurt and the Frederick she supposed she had married was mangled out of
recognition, she hung him up finally by her bedside as the chief
subject of her prayers, and left him, except for those, entirely to
God. She had loved Frederick too deeply to be able now to do anything
but pray for him. He had no idea that he never went out of the house
without her blessing going with him too, hovering, like a little echo
of finished love, round that once dear head. She didn’t dare think of
him as he used to be, as he had seemed to her to be in those marvellous
first days of their love-making, of their marriage. Her child had died;
she had nothing, nobody of her own to lavish herself on. The poor
became her children, and God the object of her love. What could be
happier than such a life, she sometimes asked herself; but her face,
and particularly her eyes, continued sad.

“Perhaps when we’re old . . . perhaps when we are both quite old . . .”
she would think wistfully.




Chapter 3


The owner of the mediaeval castle was an Englishman, a Mr. Briggs, who
was in London at the moment and wrote that it had beds enough for eight
people, exclusive of servants, three sitting-rooms, battlements,
dungeons, and electric light. The rent was £60 for the month, the
servants’ wages were extra, and he wanted references—he wanted
assurances that the second half of his rent would be paid, the first
half being paid in advance, and he wanted assurances of respectability
from a solicitor, or a doctor, or a clergyman. He was very polite in
his letter, explaining that his desire for references was what was
usual and should be regarded as a mere formality.

Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins had not thought of references, and they
had not dreamed a rent could be so high. In their minds had floated
sums like three guineas a week; or less, seeing that the place was
small and old.

Sixty pounds for a single month.

It staggered them.

Before Mrs. Arbuthnot’s eyes rose up boots: endless vistas, all the
stout boots that sixty pounds would buy; and besides the rent there
would be the servants’ wages, and the food, and the railway journeys
out and home. While as for references, these did indeed seem a
stumbling-block; it did seem impossible to give any without making
their plan more public than they had intended.

They had both—even Mrs. Arbuthnot, lured for once away from perfect
candour by the realisation of the great saving of trouble and criticism
an imperfect explanation would produce—they had both thought it would
be a good plan to give out, each to her own circle, their circles being
luckily distinct, that each was going to stay with a friend who had a
house in Italy. It would be true as far as it went—Mrs. Wilkins
asserted that it would be quite true, but Mrs. Arbuthnot thought it
wouldn’t be quite—and it was the only way, Mrs. Wilkins said, to keep
Mellersh even approximately quiet. To spend any of her money just on
the mere getting to Italy would cause him indignation; what he would
say if he knew she was renting part of a mediaeval castle on her own
account Mrs. Wilkins preferred not to think. It would take him days to
say it all; and this although it was her very own money, and not a
penny of it had ever been his.

“But I expect,” she said, “your husband is just the same. I expect all
husbands are alike in the long run.”

Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing, because her reason for not wanting
Frederick to know was the exactly opposite one—Frederick would be only
too pleased for her to go, he would not mind it in the very least;
indeed, he would hail such a manifestation of self-indulgence and
worldliness with an amusement that would hurt, and urge her to have a
good time and not to hurry home with a crushing detachment. Far better,
she thought, to be missed by Mellersh than to be sped by Frederick. To
be missed, to be needed, from whatever motive, was, she thought, better
than the complete loneliness of not being missed or needed at all.

She therefore said nothing, and allowed Mrs. Wilkins to leap at her
conclusions unchecked. But they did, both of them, for a whole day feel
that the only thing to be done was to renounce the mediaeval castle;
and it was in arriving at this bitter decision that they really
realised how acute had been their longing for it.

Then Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose mind was trained in the finding of ways out
of difficulties, found a way out of the reference difficulty; and
simultaneously Mrs. Wilkins had a vision revealing to her how to reduce
the rent.

Mrs. Arbuthnot’s plan was simple, and completely successful. She took
the whole of the rent in person to the owner, drawing it out of her
Savings Bank—again she looked furtive and apologetic, as if the clerk
must know the money was wanted for purposes of self-indulgence—and,
going up with the six ten pound notes in her hand-bag to the address
near the Brompton Oratory where the owner lived, presented them to him,
waiving her right to pay only half. And when he saw her, and her parted
hair and soft dark eyes and sober apparel, and heard her grave voice,
he told her not to bother about writing round for those references.

“It’ll be all right,” he said, scribbling a receipt for the rent. “Do
sit down, won’t you? Nasty day, isn’t it? You’ll find the old castle
has lots of sunshine, whatever else it hasn’t got. Husband going?”

Mrs. Arbuthnot, unused to anything but candour, looked troubled at this
question and began to murmur inarticulately, and the owner at once
concluded that she was a widow—a war one, of course, for other widows
were old—and that he had been a fool not to guess it.

“Oh, I’m sorry,” he said, turning red right up to his fair hair. “I
didn’t mean—h’m, h’m, h’m—”

He ran his eye over the receipt he had written. “Yes, I think that’s
all right,” he said, getting up and giving it to her. “Now,” he added,
taking the six notes she held out and smiling, for Mrs. Arbuthnot was
agreeable to look at, “I’m richer, and you’re happier. I’ve got money,
and you’ve got San Salvatore. I wonder which is best.”

“I think you know,” said Mrs. Arbuthnot with her sweet smile.

He laughed and opened the door for her. It was a pity the interview was
over. He would have liked to ask her to lunch with him. She made him
think of his mother, of his nurse, of all things kind and comforting,
besides having the attraction of not being his mother or his nurse.

“I hope you’ll like the old place,” he said, holding her hand a minute
at the door. The very feel of her hand, even through its glove, was
reassuring; it was the sort of hand, he thought, that children would
like to hold in the dark. “In April, you know, it’s simply a mass of
flowers. And then there’s the sea. You must wear white. You’ll fit in
very well. There are several portraits of you there.”

“Portraits?”
