The Project Gutenberg eBook of Society in America, Volume 1 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Society in America, Volume 1 (of 2)

Author: Harriet Martineau

Release date: July 22, 2016 [eBook #52621]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Julia Miller, Martin Pettit and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY IN AMERICA, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***

SOCIETY IN AMERICA


BY
HARRIET MARTINEAU,

AUTHOR OF "ILLUSTRATIONS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY."

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I. (of II)

NEW YORK
SAUNDERS AND OTLEY, ANN STREET,
AND CONDUIT STREET, LONDON.
1837.




INTRODUCTION.


"To seize a character, even that of one man, in its life and secret
mechanism, requires a philosopher; to delineate it with truth and
impressiveness is work for a poet. How then shall one or two sleek
clerical tutors, with here and there a tedium-stricken esquire, or
speculative half-pay captain, give us views on such a subject? How shall
a man, to whom all characters of individual men are like sealed books,
of which he sees only the title and the covers, decipher from his
four-wheeled vehicle, and depict to us, the character of a nation? He
courageously depicts his own optical delusions; notes this to be
incomprehensible, that other to be insignificant; much to be good, much
to be bad, and most of all indifferent; and so, with a few flowing
strokes, completes a picture, which, though it may not resemble any
possible object, his countrymen are to take for a national portrait. Nor
is the fraud so readily detected: for the character of a people has
such a complexity of aspect, that even the honest observer knows not
always, not perhaps after long inspection, what to determine regarding
it. From his, only accidental, point of view, the figure stands before
him like the tracings on veined marble,--a mass of mere random lines,
and tints, and entangled strokes, out of which a lively fancy may shape
almost _any_ image. But the image he brings with him is always the
readiest; this is tried; it answers as well as another; and a second
voucher now testifies its correctness. Thus each, in confident tones,
though it be with a secret misgiving, repeats his precursor; the
hundred-times-repeated comes in the end to be believed; the foreign
nation is now once for all understood, decided on, and registered
accordingly; and dunce the thousandth writes of it like dunce the
first."--_Edinburgh Review, No._ xlvi. p. 309.


This passage cannot but strike upon the heart of any traveller who
meditates giving to the world an account of the foreign country he has
visited. It is the mirror held up before his face; and he inevitably
feels himself, for the moment, "dunce the thousandth." For my own part,
I felt the truth contained in this picture so strongly, before I was
acquainted with the passage itself, that I had again and again put away
the idea of saying one word in print on the condition of society in the
United States. Whenever I encountered half-a-dozen irreconcilable, but
respectable opinions on a single point of political doctrine; whenever
half-a-dozen fair-seeming versions of a single fact were offered to me;
whenever the glow of pleasure at obtaining, by some trivial accident, a
piece of important knowledge passed into a throb of pain at the thought
of how much must remain concealed where a casual glimpse disclosed so
much; whenever I felt how I, with my pittance of knowledge and amidst my
glimmerings of conviction, was at the mercy of unmanageable
circumstances, wafted now here and now there, by the currents of
opinion, like one surveying a continent from a balloon, with only
starlight above him,--I was tempted to decline the task of generalising
at all from what I saw and heard. In the intervals, however, I felt that
this would be wrong. Men will never arrive at a knowledge of each other,
if those who have the opportunity of foreign observation refuse to
relate what they think they have learned; or even to lay before others
the materials from which they themselves hesitate to construct a theory,
or draw large conclusions.

In seeking for methods by which I might communicate what I have observed
in my travels, without offering any pretension to teach the English, or
judge the Americans, two expedients occurred to me; both of which I have
adopted. One is, to compare the existing state of society in America
with the principles on which it is professedly founded; thus testing
Institutions, Morals, and Manners by an indisputable, instead of an
arbitrary standard, and securing to myself the same point of view with
my readers of both nations.

In working according to this method, my principal dangers are two. I am
in danger of not fully apprehending the principles on which society in
the United States is founded; and of erring in the application to these
of the facts which came under my notice. In the last respect, I am
utterly hopeless of my own accuracy. It is in the highest degree
improbable that my scanty gleanings in the wide field of American
society should present a precisely fair sample of the whole. I can only
explain that I have spared no pains to discover the truth, in both
divisions of my task; and invite correction, in all errors of fact. This
I earnestly do; holding myself, of course, an equal judge with others on
matters of opinion.

My readers, on their part, will bear in mind that, in showing
discrepancies between an actual condition and a pure and noble theory
of society, I am not finding fault with the Americans, as for falling
behind the English, or the French, or any other nation. I decline the
office of censor altogether. I dare not undertake it. Nor will my
readers, I trust, regard the subject otherwise than as a compound of
philosophy and fact. If we can all, for once, allay our personal
feelings, dismiss our too great regard to mutual opinion, and put praise
and blame as nearly as possible out of the question, more that is
advantageous to us may perhaps be learned than by any invidious
comparisons and proud judgments that were ever instituted and
pronounced.

The other method by which I propose to lessen my own responsibility, is
to enable my readers to judge for themselves, better than I can for
them, what my testimony is worth. For this purpose, I offer a brief
account of my travels, with dates in full; and a report of the principal
means I enjoyed of obtaining a knowledge of the country.

At the close of a long work which I completed in 1834, it was thought
desirable that I should travel for two years. I determined to go to the
United States, chiefly because I felt a strong curiosity to witness the
actual working of republican institutions; and partly because the
circumstance of the language being the same as my own is very important
to one who, like myself, is too deaf to enjoy anything like an average
opportunity of obtaining correct knowledge, where intercourse is carried
on in a foreign language. I went with a mind, I believe, as nearly as
possible unprejudiced about America, with a strong disposition to admire
democratic institutions, but an entire ignorance how far the people of
the United States lived up to, or fell below, their own theory. I had
read whatever I could lay hold of that had been written about them; but
was unable to satisfy myself that, after all, I understood anything
whatever of their condition. As to knowledge of them, my mind was nearly
a blank: as to opinion of their state, I did not carry the germ of one.

I landed at New York on the 19th of September, 1834: paid a short visit
the next week to Paterson, in New Jersey, to see the cotton factories
there, and the falls of the Passaic; and passed through New York again
on my way to stay with some friends on the banks of the Hudson, and at
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. On the 6th of October, I joined some
companions at Albany, with whom I travelled through the State of New
York, seeing Trenton Falls, Auburn, and Buffalo, to the Falls of
Niagara. Here I remained nearly a week; then, after spending a few days
at Buffalo, I embarked on Lake Erie, landing in the back of
Pennsylvania, and travelling down through Meadville to Pittsburgh,
spending a few days at each place. Then, over the Alleghanies to
Northumberland, on the fork of the Susquehanna, the abode of Priestley
after his exile, and his burial place. I arrived at Northumberland on
the 11th of October, and left it, after visiting some villages in the
neighbourhood, on the 17th, for Philadelphia, where I remained nearly
six weeks, having very extensive intercourses with its various society.
My stay at Baltimore was three weeks, and at Washington five. Congress
was at that time in session, and I enjoyed peculiar opportunities of
witnessing the proceedings of the Supreme Court and both houses of
Congress. I was acquainted with almost every eminent senator and
representative, both on the administration and opposition sides; and was
on friendly and intimate terms with some of the judges of the Supreme
Court. I enjoyed the hospitality of the President, and of several of the
heads of departments: and was, like everybody else, in society from
morning till night of every day; as the custom is at Washington. One
day was devoted to a visit to Mount Vernon, the abode and burial-place
of Washington.

On the 18th of February I arrived at Montpelier, the seat of Mr. and
Mrs. Madison, with whom I spent two days, which were wholly occupied
with rapid conversation; Mr. Madison's share of which, various and
beautiful to a remarkable degree, will never be forgotten by me. His
clear reports of the principles and history of the Constitution of the
United States, his insight into the condition, his speculations on the
prospects of nations, his wise playfulness, his placid contemplation of
present affairs, his abundant household anecdotes of Washington,
Franklin, and Jefferson, were incalculably valuable and exceedingly
delightful to me.

The intercourse which I had with Chief Justice Marshall was of the same
character, though not nearly so copious. Nothing in either delighted me
more than their hearty admiration of each other, notwithstanding some
wide differences in their political views. They are both gone; and I now
deeply feel what a privilege it is to have known them.

From Mr. Madison's I proceeded to Charlottesville, and passed two days
amidst the hospitalities of the Professors of Jefferson's University,
and their families. I was astonished to learn that this institution had
never before been visited by a British traveller. I can only be sorry
for British travellers who have missed the pleasure. A few days more
were given to Richmond, where the Virginia legislature was in session;
and then ensued a long wintry journey though North and South Carolina to
Charleston, occupying from the 2nd to the 11th of March. The
hospitalities of Charleston are renowned; and I enjoyed them in their
perfection for a fortnight; and then a renewal of the same kind of
pleasures at Columbia, South Carolina, for ten days. I traversed the
southern States, staying three days at Augusta, Georgia, and nearly a
fortnight in and near Montgomery, Alabama; descending next the Alabama
river to Mobile. After a short stay there, and a residence of ten days
at New Orleans, I went up the Mississippi and Ohio to the mouth of the
Cumberland river, which I ascended to Nashville, Tennessee. I visited
the Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, and spent three weeks at Lexington. I
descended the Ohio to Cincinnati; and after staying there ten days,
ascended the river again, landing in Virginia, visiting the Hawk's Nest,
Sulphur Springs, Natural Bridge, and Weyer's Cave, arriving at New York
again on the 14th of July, 1835. The autumn was spent among the villages
and smaller towns of Massachusetts, in a visit to Dr. Channing in Rhode
Island, and in an excursion to the mountains of New Hampshire and
Vermont. The winter was passed in Boston, with the exception of a trip
to Plymouth, for "Forefather's Day." In the Spring I spent seven weeks
in New York; and a month in a farmhouse at Stockbridge, Massachusetts;
making an excursion, meanwhile, to Saratoga and Lake George. My last
journey was with a party of friends, far into the west, visiting Niagara
again, proceeding by Lake Erie to Detroit, and across the territory of
Michigan. We swept round the southern extremity of Lake Michigan to
Chicago: went a long day's journey down into the prairies, back to
Chicago, and by the Lakes Michigan, Huron, and St. Clair to Detroit,
visiting Mackinaw by the way. We landed from Lake Erie at Cleveland,
Ohio, on the 13th of July; and travelled through the interior of Ohio
till we joined the river at Beaver. We visited Rapp's Settlement at
Economy, on the Ohio, and returned to New York from Pittsburgh, by the
canal route through Pennsylvania, and the rail-road over the
Alleghanies. I sailed from New York for England on the 1st of August,
1836, having then been absent just two years.

In the course of this tour, I visited almost every kind of institution.
The prisons of Auburn, Philadelphia, and Nashville: the insane and other
hospitals of almost every considerable place: the literary and
scientific institutions; the factories of the north; the plantations of
the south; the farms of the west. I lived in houses which might be
called palaces, in log-houses, and in a farm-house. I travelled much in
wagons, as well as stages; also on horseback, and in some of the best
and worst of steam-boats. I saw weddings, and christenings; the
gatherings of the richer at watering places, and of the humbler at
country festivals. I was present at orations, at land sales, and in the
slave market. I was in frequent attendance on the Supreme Court and the
Senate; and witnessed some of the proceedings of state legislatures.
Above all, I was received into the bosom of many families, not as a
stranger, but as a daughter or a sister. I am qualified, if any one is,
to testify to the virtues and the peace of the homes of the United
States; and let it not be thought a breach of confidence, if I should be
found occasionally to have spoken of these out of the fulness of my
heart.

It would be nearly impossible to relate whom I knew, during my travels.
Nearly every eminent man in politics, science and literature, and
almost every distinguished woman, would grace my list. I have respected
and beloved friends of each political party; and of nearly every
religious denomination; among slave-holders, colonizationists, and
abolitionists; among farmers, lawyers, merchants, professors, and
clergy. I travelled among several tribes of Indians; and spent months in
the southern States, with negroes ever at my heels.

Such were my means of information. With regard to my power of making use
of them, I have but a few words to say.

It has been frequently mentioned to me that my being a woman was one
disadvantage; and my being previously heard of, another. In this I do
not agree.

I am sure, I have seen much more of domestic life than could possibly
have been exhibited to any gentleman travelling through the country. The
nursery, the boudoir, the kitchen, are all excellent schools in which to
learn the morals and manners of a people: and, as for public and
professional affairs,--those may always gain full information upon such
matters, who really feel an interest in them,--be they men or women. No
people in the world can be more frank, confiding and affectionate, or
more skilful and liberal in communicating information, than I have ever
found the Americans to be. I never asked in vain; and I seldom had to
ask at all; so carefully were my inquiries anticipated, and my aims so
completely understood. I doubt whether a single fact that I wished to
learn, or any doctrine that I desired to comprehend, was ever kept from
me because I was a woman.

As for the other objection, I can only state my belief, that my friends
and I found personal acquaintance so much pleasanter than any previous
knowledge by hearsay, that we always forgot that we had heard of each
other before. It would be preposterous to suppose that, received as I
was into intimate confidence, any false appearances could be kept up on
account of any preconceptions that could have been entertained of me.

I laboured under only one peculiar disadvantage, that I am aware of; but
that one is incalculable. I mean my deafness. This does not endanger the
accuracy of my information, I believe, as far as it goes; because I
carry a trumpet of remarkable fidelity; an instrument, moreover, which
seems to exert some winning power, by which I gain more in
_tête-à-têtes_ than is given to people who hear general conversation.
Probably its charm consists in the new feeling which it imparts of ease
and privacy in conversing with a deaf person. However this may be, I can
hardly imagine fuller revelations to be made in household intercourse
than my trumpet brought to me. But I am aware that there is no
estimating the loss, in a foreign country, from not hearing the casual
conversation of all kinds of people, in the streets, stages, hotels, &c.
I am aware that the lights which are thus gathered up by the traveller
for himself are often far more valuable than the most elaborate accounts
of things offered to him with an express design. This was my peculiar
disadvantage. It could not be helped; and it cannot be explained away. I
mention it, that the value of my testimony may be lowered according to
the supposed worth of this circumstance.

Much is often said about the delicacy to be observed, in the act of
revealing the history of one's travels, towards the hosts and other
friends of the traveller who have reposed confidence in him. The rule
seems to me a very plain one, which reconciles truth, honour and
utility. My rule is to speak of the public acts of public persons,
precisely as if I had known them only in their public character. This
may be sometimes difficult, and sometimes painful, to the writer; but it
leaves no just cause of complaint to any one else. Moreover, I hold it
allowable and necessary to make use of opinions and facts offered in
fire-side confidence, as long as no clue is offered by which they may be
traced back to any particular fire-side. If any of my American friends
should find in this book traces of old conversations and incidents, let
them keep their own counsel, and be assured that the conversation and
facts remain private between them and me. Thus far, all is safe; and
further than this, no honourable person would wish to go.

This is not the place in which to speak of my obligations or of my
friendships. Those who know best what I have in my heart to say meet me
here under a new relation. In these pages, we meet as writer and
readers. I would only entreat them to bear this distinction in mind, and
not to measure my attachment to themselves by anything this book may
contain about their country and their nation. The bond which unites us
bears no relation to clime, birth-place, or institutions. In as far as
our friendship is faithful, we are fellow-citizens of another and a
better country than theirs or mine.




CONTENTS.

VOL. I.

                                                 _Page_
INTRODUCTION                                          i


PART I.

POLITICS                                              1

CHAPTER I.

PARTIES                                               8

CHAPTER II.

APPARATUS OF GOVERNMENT                              32
  SECTION I.--The General Government                 35
         II.--The Executive                          52
        III.--The State Governments                  64

CHAPTER III.

MORALS OF POLITICS                                   82
  SECTION I.--Office                                 84
         II.--Newspapers                            109
        III.--Apathy in Citizenship                 115
         IV.--Allegiance to Law                     120
          V.--Sectional Prejudice                   135
         VI.--Citizenship of People of Colour       144
        VII.--Political Non-Existence of Women      148


PART II.

ECONOMY                                             155
   Solitaires                                       162
   Springs of Virginia                              175
   New England Farm-house                           193
   West Country Life                                201
   Township of Gloucester                           205
   South Country Life                               212
   Picture of Michigan                              232
   The Northern Lakes                               270

CHAPTER I.

AGRICULTURE                                         291
  SECTION I.--Disposal of Land                      318
         II.--Rural Labour                          338




SOCIETY IN AMERICA




PART I.

POLITICS.

     " ... Those unalterable relations which Providence has ordained
     that everything should bear to every other. These relations, which
     are truth itself, the foundation of virtue, and consequently, the
     only measures of happiness, should be likewise the only measures by
     which we should direct our reasoning. To these we should conform in
     good earnest, and not think to force nature, and the whole order of
     her system, by a compliance with our pride and folly, to conform to
     our artificial regulations. It is by a conformity to this method we
     owe the discovery of the few truths we know, and the little liberty
     and rational happiness we enjoy." _Burke._


Mr. Madison remarked to me, that the United States had been "useful in
proving things before held impossible." Of such proofs, he adduced
several. Others, which he did not mention, have since occurred to me;
and, among them, the pursuit of the _à priori_ method in forming a
constitution:--the _à priori_ method, as it is styled by its enemies,
though its advocates, with more reason, call it the inductive method.
Till the formation of the government of the United States, it had been
generally supposed, and it is so still by the majority of the old world,
that a sound theory of government can be constructed only out of the
experience of man in governments; the experience mankind has had of
despotisms, oligarchies, and the mixtures of these with small portions
of democracy. But the essential condition of the fidelity of the
inductive method is, that all the elements of experience should be
included. If, in this particular problem, of the true theory of
government, we take all experience of government, and leave out all
experience of man, except in his hitherto governing or governed state,
we shall never reach a philosophical conclusion. The true application of
the inductive method here is to test a theory of government deduced from
the principles of human nature, by the results of all governments of
which mankind has had experience. No narrower basis will serve for such
an induction. Such a method of finding a good theory of government was
considered impossible, till the United States "proved" it.

This proof can never be invalidated by anything that can now happen in
the United States. It is common to say "Wait; these are early days. The
experiment will fail yet." The experiment of the particular constitution
of the United States may fail; but the great principle which, whether
successfully or not, it strives to embody,--the capacity of mankind for
self-government,--is established for ever. It has, as Mr. Madison said,
proved a thing previously held impossible. If a revolution were to take
place to-morrow in the United States, it remains an historical fact
that, for half a century, a people has been self-governed; and, till it
can be proved that the self-government is the cause of the instability,
no revolution, or series of revolutions, can tarnish the lustre, any
more than they can impair the soundness of the principle that mankind
are capable of self-government. The United States have indeed been
useful in proving these two things, before held impossible; the finding
a true theory of government, by reasoning from the principles of human
nature, as well as from the experience of governments; and the capacity
of mankind for self-government.

It seems strange that while politics are unquestionably a branch of
moral science, bearing no other relation than to the duty and happiness
of man, the great principles of his nature should have been neglected by
politicians--with the exception of his love of power and desire of
gain,--till a set of men assembled in the State House at Philadelphia,
in the eighteenth century, and there throned a legitimate political
philosophy in the place of a deposed king. The _rationale_ of all
preceding governments had been, "men love power, therefore there must be
punishments for rulers who, having already much, would seize more. Men
desire gain; therefore there must be punishments for those, rulers or
ruled, who would appropriate the gains of others." The _rationale_ of
the new and "impossible" government is "that all men are created equal;
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable lights;
that among them are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to
secure those rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving
their just powers from the consent of the governed."[1] This last
recognizes, over and above what the former admits, the great principles
of indefeasible rights; human equality in relation to these; and the
obligation of universal justice.

These, then, are the principles which the statesmen in the State House
at Philadelphia announced as the soul of their embryo institutions; and
the rule through which they were to work was no less than that golden
one which seems to have been, by some unhappy chance, omitted in the
bibles of other statesmen--"Do unto others as ye would that they should
do unto you." Perhaps it may be reserved for their country to prove yet
one more impossible thing--that men can live by the rule which their
Maker has given them to live by. Meanwhile, every true citizen of that
country must necessarily be content to have his self-government tried by
the test of these principles, to which, by his citizenship, he has
become a subscriber. He will scorn all comparisons, instituted as a test
of merit, between his own government and those of other countries, which
he must necessarily consider as of narrower scope and lower aim. Whether
such comparisons be instituted abroad in a spirit of contempt, or at
home in a spirit of complacency, he will regard them equally as
irrelevant, and proving nothing to the best purposes of true citizens.
He will disdain every test but that furnished by the great principles
propounded in the State House at Philadelphia; and he will quarrel with
no results fairly brought out by such a test, whether they inspire him
with shame, or with complacency. In either case, he will be animated by
them.

If the politics of a country be really derived from fundamental
principles of human nature and morals, the economy, manners, and
religion of that country must be designed to harmonise with these
principles. The same test must be applicable to all. The inalienable
right of all the human race to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, must control the economical, as well as the political
arrangements of a people; and the law of universal justice must regulate
all social intercourse, and direct all administration of religion.

Politics are morals, all the world over; that is, politics universally
implicate the duty and happiness of man. Every branch of morals is, and
ought to be considered, a universal concern. Under despotic governments,
there is a pretension, more or less sincere, on the part of the rulers,
to moral regards; but from these the bulk of the people are, by common
consent, cut off. If the bulk of the people saw the truth, that the
principles of politics affect them,--are the message of their Maker as
principles are to them, as well as to their rulers, they would become
moral agents in regard to politics, and despotism would be at an end. As
it is, they pay their taxes, and go out to war when they are bid, are
thankful when they are left unmolested by their government, and sorry or
angry when they feel themselves oppressed; and there they end. It is
owing to their ignorance of politics being morals--_i. e._ matters of
equal concern to all--that this truth is not made manifest in action in
every country on the globe that has any government at all.

The same is the case of the unrepresented under governments which are
not called despotic. According to the principles professed by the United
States, there is there a rectification of this mighty error--a
correction of this grand oversight. In that self-governing nation, all
are held to have an equal interest in the principles of its
institutions, and to be bound in equal duty to watch their workings.
Politics there are universal duty. None are exempted from obligation but
the unrepresented; and they, in theory, are none. However various may be
the tribes of inhabitants in those States, whatever part of the world
may have been their birth-place, or that of their fathers, however
broken may be their language, however noble or servile their
employments, however exalted or despised their state, all are declared
to be bound together by equal political obligation, as firmly as under
any other law of personal or social duty. The president, the senator,
the governor, may take upon himself some additional responsibility, as
the physician and lawyer do in other departments of office; but they
are under precisely the same political obligation as the German settler,
whose axe echoes through the lonely forest; and the Southern planter,
who is occupied with his hospitalities; and the New England merchant,
whose thoughts are on the sea; and the Irishman, in his shanty on the
canal-bank; and the negro, hoeing cotton in the hot field, or basking
away his sabbath on the shore of the Mississippi. Genius, knowledge,
wealth, may in other affairs set a man above his fellows; but not in
this. Weakness, ignorance, poverty may exempt a man from other
obligations; but not from this. The theory of the government of the
United States has grasped and embodied the mighty principle, that
politics are morals;--that is, a matter of universal and equal concern.
We shall have to see whether this principle is fully acted out.

Implicated with this is the theory, that the majority will be in the
right, both as to the choice of principles which are to govern
particular cases, and the agents who are to work them. This theory,
obviously just as it appears, as long as it is applied to matters of
universal and equal concern, cannot be set aside without overthrowing
all with which it is involved. We shall have to see, also, whether this
principle is effectually carried out.

Implicated with this, again, is the principle that a mutable, or rather
elastic form, must be given to every institution. "The majority are in
the right." Such is the theory. Few individuals of this majority can act
for longer than two-score years and ten; few for so long. No one can
suppose that his successor will think or feel as he does, however strict
may be the regard of each to the fundamental principles which are to
regulate his citizenship. It is absolutely necessary, to secure
permanence to the recognition of those principles, that there should be
liberty to change the form which contains them. Else, in the endless
variety of human views and interests, there is danger lest men, being
prohibited from producing a correspondence between the principles they
recognise, and the forms they desire, should, because interdicted from
outward change, gradually alter the spirit of their government. In such
a case, men would be some time in discovering that the fair body of
their constitution has become possessed, while they had supposed her
inspired: and, to pass over the mischiefs which might happen during the
period of her possession, the work of exorcism would be difficult and
perilous.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Declaration of Independence.




CHAPTER I.

PARTIES.

     "For these are the men that, when they have played their parts, and
     had their exits, must step out, and give the moral of their scenes,
     and deliver unto posterity an inventory of their virtues and
     vices."

     _Sir Thomas Browne._


The first gentleman who greeted me on my arrival in the United States, a
few minutes after I had landed, informed me without delay, that I had
arrived at an unhappy crisis; that the institutions of the country would
be in ruins before my return to England; that the levelling spirit was
desolating society; and that the United States were on the verge of a
military despotism. This was so very like what I had been accustomed to
hear at home, from time to time, since my childhood, that I was not
quite so much alarmed as I might have been without such prior
experience. It was amusing too to find America so veritably the daughter
of England.

I looked around me carefully, in all my travels, till I reached
Washington, but could see no signs of despotism; even less of military.
Except the officers and cadets at West Point, and some militia on a
training day at Saugerties, higher up on the Hudson, I saw nothing that
could be called military; and officers, cadets, and militia, appeared
all perfectly innocent of any design to seize upon the government. At
Washington, I ventured to ask an explanation from one of the most
honoured statesmen now living; who told me, with a smile, that the
country had been in "a crisis" for fifty years past; and would be for
fifty years to come.

This information was my comfort, from day to day, till I became
sufficiently acquainted with the country to need such support no longer.
Mournful predictions, like that I have quoted, were made so often, that
it was easy to learn how they originated.

In the United States, as elsewhere, there are, and have always been, two
parties in politics, whom it is difficult to distinguish on paper, by a
statement of their principles, but whose course of action may, in any
given case, be pretty confidently anticipated. It is remarkable how
nearly their positive statements of political doctrine agree, while they
differ in almost every possible application of their common principles.
Close and continued observation of their agreements and differences is
necessary before the British traveller can fully comprehend their mutual
relation. In England, the differences of parties are so broad,--between
those who would have the people governed for the convenience of their
rulers; those who would have the many governed, for their good, by the
will of the few; and those who would have the people govern
themselves;--that it is, for some time, difficult to comprehend how
there should be party differences as wide in a country where the first
principle of government is that the people are to govern themselves. The
case, however, becomes clear in time: and, amidst a half century of
"crises," the same order and sequence become discernible which run
through the whole course of human affairs.

As long as men continue as differently organized as they now are, there
will be two parties under every government. Even if their outward
fortunes could be absolutely equalised, there would be, from individual
constitution alone, an aristocracy and a democracy in every land. The
fearful by nature would compose an aristocracy, the hopeful by nature a
democracy, were all other causes of divergence done away. When to these
constitutional differences are added all those outward circumstances
which go to increase the fear and the hope, the mutual misunderstandings
of parties are no longer to be wondered at. Men who have gained wealth,
whose hope is fulfilled, and who fear loss by change, are naturally of
the aristocratic class. So are men of learning, who, unconsciously
identifying learning and wisdom, fear the elevation of the ignorant to a
station like their own. So are men of talent, who, having gained the
power which is the fit recompense of achievement, dread the having to
yield it to numbers instead of desert. So are many more who feel the
almost universal fear of having to part with educational prejudices,
with doctrines with which honoured teachers nourished the pride of
youth, and prepossessions inwoven with all that has been to them most
pure, lofty, and graceful. Out of these a large aristocratic class must
everywhere be formed.

Out of the hopeful,--the rising, not the risen,--the aspiring, not the
satisfied,--must a still larger class be everywhere formed. It will
include all who have most to gain and least to lose; and most of those
who, in the present state of education, have gained their knowledge from
actual life, rather than, or as well as, from books. It will include the
adventurers of society, and also the philanthropists. It will include,
moreover,--an accession small in number, but inestimable in power,--the
men of genius. It is characteristic of genius to be hopeful and
aspiring. It is characteristic of genius to break up the artificial
arrangements of conventionalism, and to view mankind in true
perspective, in their gradations of inherent rather than of adventitious
worth. Genius is therefore essentially democratic, and has always been
so, whatever titles its gifted ones may have worn, or on whatever
subjects they may have exercised their gifts. To whatever extent men of
genius have been aristocratic, they have been so in spite of their
genius, not in consistency with it. The instances are so few, and their
deviations from the democratic principle so small, that men of genius
must be considered as included in the democratic class.

Genius being rare, and its claims but tardily allowed by those who have
attained greatness by other means, it seems as if the weight of
influence possessed by the aristocratic party,--by that party which,
generally speaking, includes the wealth, learning, and talents of the
country,--must overpower all opposition. If this is found not to be the
case, if it be found that the democratic party has achieved everything
that has been achieved since the United States' constitution began to
work, it is no wonder that there is panic in many hearts, and that I
heard from so many tongues of the desolations of the "levelling spirit,"
and the approaching ruin of political institutions.

These classes may be distinguished in another way. The description which
Jefferson gave of the federal and republican parties of 1799 applies to
the federal and democratic parties of this day, and to the aristocratic
and democratic parties of every time and country. "One," says Jefferson,
"fears most the ignorance of the people; the other, the selfishness of
rulers independent of them."

There is much reason in both these fears. The unreasonableness of party
lies in entertaining the one fear, and not the other. No argument is
needed to prove that rulers are prone to selfishness and narrowness of
views: and no one can have witnessed the injuries that the poor suffer
in old countries,--the education of hardship and insult that furnishes
them with their only knowledge of the highest classes, without being
convinced that their ignorance is to be feared;--their ignorance, not so
much of books as of liberty and law. In old countries, the question
remains open whether the many should, on account of their ignorance, be
kept still in a state of political servitude, as some declare; or
whether they should be gradually prepared for political freedom, as
others think, by an amelioration of their condition, and by being
educated in schools; or whether, as yet others maintain, the exercise of
political rights and duties be not the only possible political
education. In the New World, no such question remains to be debated. It
has no large, degraded, injured, dangerous (white) class who can afford
the slightest pretence for a panic-cry about agrarianism. Throughout the
prodigious expanse of that country, I saw no poor _men_, except a few
intemperate ones. I saw some very poor _women_; but God and man know
that the time has not come for women to make their injuries even heard
of. I saw no beggars but two professional ones, who are making their
fortunes in the streets of Washington. I saw no table spread, in the
lowest order of houses, that had not meat and bread on it. Every factory
child carries its umbrella; and pig-drivers wear spectacles. With the
exception of the foreign paupers on the seaboard, and those who are
steeped in sensual vice, neither of which classes can be politically
dangerous, there are none who have not the same interest in the security
of property as the richest merchant of Salem, or planter of Louisiana.
Whether the less wealthy class will not be the first to draw out from
reason and experience the true philosophy of property, is another
question. All we have to do with now is their equal interest with their
richer neighbours in the security of property, in the present state of
society. Law and order are as important to the man who holds land for
the subsistence of his family, or who earns wages that he may have land
of his own to die upon, as to any member of the president's cabinet.

Nor is there much more to fear from the ignorance of the bulk of the
people in the United States, than from their poverty. It is too true
that there is much ignorance; so much as to be an ever-present peril.
Though, as a whole, the nation is, probably, better informed than any
other entire nation, it cannot be denied that their knowledge is far
inferior to what their safety and their virtue require. But _whose_
ignorance is it? And ignorance of _what_? If the professors of colleges
have book-knowledge, which the owner of a log-house has not; the owner
of a log-house has very often, as I can testify, a knowledge of natural
law, political rights, and economical fact, which the college-professor
has not. I often longed to confront some of each class, to see whether
there was any common ground on which they could meet. If not, the one
might bring the charge of ignorance as justly as the other. If a common
ground could be discovered, it would have been in their equal relation
to the government under which they live: in which case, the natural
conclusion would be, that each understood his own interests best, and
neither could assume superiority over the other. The particular
ignorance of the countryman may expose him to be flattered and cheated
by an oratorical office-seeker, or a dishonest newspaper. But, on the
other hand, the professor's want of knowledge of the actual affairs of
the many, and his educational biases, are just as likely to cause him to
vote contrary to the public interest. No one who has observed society in
America will question the existence or the evil of ignorance there: but
neither will he question that such real knowledge as they have is pretty
fairly shared among them.

I travelled by wagon, with a party of friends, in the interior of Ohio.
Our driver must be a man of great and various knowledge, if he questions
all strangers as he did us, and obtains as copious answers. He told us
where and how he lived, of his nine children, of his literary daughters,
and the pains he was at to get books for them; and of his hopes from his
girl of fourteen, who writes poetry, which he keeps a secret, lest she
should be spoiled. He told us that he seldom lets his fingers touch a
novel, because the consequence always is that his business stands still
till the novel is finished; "and that doesn't suit." He recited to us,
Pope's "Happy the man whose wish and care," &c. saying that it suited
his idea exactly. He asked both the ladies present whether they had
written a book. Both had; and he carried away the titles, that he might
buy the books for his daughters. This man is fully informed of the value
of the Union, as we had reason to perceive; and it is difficult to see
why he is not as fit as any other man to choose the representatives of
his interests. Yet, here is a specimen of his conversation with one of
the ladies of the party.

"Was the book that you wrote on natural philosophy, madam?"

"No; I know nothing about natural philosophy."

"Hum! Because one lady has done that pretty well:--hit it!--Miss Porter,
you know."

"What Miss Porter?"

"She that wrote 'Thaddeus of Warsaw,' you know. She did it pretty well
there."

As an antagonist case, take the wailings of a gentleman of very
distinguished station in a highly aristocratic section of
society;--wailings over the extent of the suffrage.

"What an enormity it is that such a man as Judge ----, there, should
stand on no higher level in politics than the man that grooms his
horse!"

"Why should he? I suppose they have both got all they want,--full
representation: and they thus bear precisely the same relation to the
government."

"No; the judge seldom votes, because of his office: while his groom can,
perhaps, carry nineteen men to vote as he pleases. It is monstrous!"

"It seems monstrous that the judge should omit his political duty for
the sake of his office; and also that nineteen men should be led by one.
But limiting the suffrage would not mend the matter. Would it not do
better to teach all the parties their duty?"

Let who will choose between the wagon-driver and the scholar. Each will
vote according to his own views; and the event,--the ultimate
majority,--will prove which is so far the wiser.

The vagueness of the antagonism between the two parties is for some time
perplexing to the traveller in America; and he does not know whether to
be most amazed or amused at the apparent triviality of the circumstances
which arouse the strongest party emotions. After a while, a body comes
out of the mystery, and he grasps a substantial cause of dissension.
From the day when the first constitution was formed, there have been
alarmists, who talk of a "crisis:" and from the day when the second
began its operations, the alarm has, very naturally, taken its subject
matter from the failure of the first. The first general government came
to a stand through weakness. The entire nation kept itself in order till
a new one was formed and set to work. As soon as the danger was over,
and the nation proved, by the last possible test, duly convinced of the
advantages of public order, the timid party took fright lest the general
government should still not be strong enough; and this tendency, of
course, set the hopeful party to watch lest it should be made too
strong. The panic and antagonism were at their height in 1799.[2] A
fearful collision of parties took place, which ended in the
establishment of the hopeful policy, which has continued, with few
interruptions, since. The executive patronage was retrenched, taxes were
taken off, the people were re-assured, and all is, as yet, safe. While
the leaders of the old federal party retired to their Essex junto, and
elsewhere, to sigh for monarchy, and yearn towards England, the greater
number threw off their fears, and joined the republican party. There are
now very few left to profess the politics of the old federalists. I met
with only two who openly avowed their desire for a monarchy; and not
many more who prophesied one. But there still is a federal party, and
there ever will be. It is as inevitable that there will be always some
who will fear the too great strength of the state governments, as that
there will be many who will have the same fear about the general
government. Instead of seeing in this any cause for dismay, or even
regret, the impartial observer will recognise in this mutual
watchfulness the best security that the case admits of for the general
and state governments preserving their due relation to one another. No
government ever yet worked both well and indisputably. A pure despotism
works (apparently) indisputably; but the bulk of its subjects will not
allow that it works well, while it wrings their heads from their
shoulders, or their earnings from their hands. The government of the
United States is disputed at every step of its workings: but the bulk of
the people declare that it works well, while every man is his own
security for his life and property.

The extreme panic of the old federal party is accounted for, and almost
justified, when we remember, not only that the commerce of England had
penetrated every part of the country, and that great pecuniary interests
were therefore everywhere supposed to be at stake; but that
republicanism, like that which now exists in America, was a thing
unheard of--an idea only half-developed in the minds of those who were
to live under it. Wisdom may spring, full-formed and accomplished, from
the head of a god, but not from the brains of men. The Americans of the
Revolution looked round upon the republics of the world, tested them by
the principles of human nature, found them republican in nothing but the
name, and produced something, more democratic than any of them; but not
democratic enough for the circumstances which were in the course of
arising. They saw that in Holland the people had nothing to do with the
erection of the supreme power; that in Poland (which was called a
republic in their day) the people were oppressed by an incubus of
monarchy and aristocracy, at once, in their most aggravated forms; and
that in Venice a small body of hereditary nobles exercised a stern sway.
They planned something far transcending in democracy any republic yet
heard of; and they are not to be wondered at, or blamed, if, when their
work was done, they feared they had gone too far. They had done much in
preparing the way for the second birth of their republic in 1789, and
for a third in 1801, when the republicans came into power; and from
which date, free government in the United States may be said to have
started on its course.

A remarkable sign of those times remains on record, which shows how
different the state of feeling and opinion was then from any that could
now prevail among a large and honourable body in the republic. The
society of the Cincinnati, an association of officers of the
revolutionary army, and other honourable persons, ordered their
proceedings in a manner totally inconsistent with the first principles
of republicanism; having secret correspondences, decking themselves with
an order, which was to be hereditary, drawing a line of distinction
between military and other citizens, and uniting in a secret bond the
chiefs of the first families of the respective States. Such an
association, formed on the model of some which might be more or less
necessary or convenient in the monarchies of the old world, could not be
allowed to exist in its feudal form in the young republic; and,
accordingly, the hereditary principle, and the power of adopting
honorary members, were relinquished; and the society is heard of no
more. It has had its use in showing how the minds of the earlier
republicans were imbued with monarchical prepossessions, and how large
is the reasonable allowance which must be made for the apprehensions of
men, who, having gone further in democracy than any who had preceded
them, were destined to see others outstrip themselves. Adams, Hamilton,
Washington! what names are these! Yet Adams in those days believed the
English constitution would be perfect, if some defects and abuses were
remedied. Hamilton believed it would be impracticable, if such
alterations were made; and that, in its then existing state, it was the
very best government that had ever been devised. Washington was
absolutely republican in his principles, but did not enjoy the strong
faith, the entire trust in the people, which is the attendant privilege
of those principles. Such men, pressed out from among the multitude by
the strong force of emergency, proved themselves worthy of their mission
of national redemption; but, though we may now be unable to single out
any who, in these comparatively quiet times, can be measured against
them, we are not thence to conclude that society, as a whole, has not
advanced; and that a policy which would have appeared dangerous to them,
may not be, at present, safe and reasonable.

Advantageous, therefore, as it may be, that the present federal party
should be perpetually on the watch against the encroachments of the
state governments,--useful as their incessant recurrence to the first
practices, as well as principles, of the constitution may be,--it would
be for their comfort to remember, that the elasticity of their
institutions is a perpetual safeguard; and, also, that the silent
influence of the federal head of their republics has a sedative effect
which its framers themselves did not anticipate. If they compare the
fickleness and turbulence of very small republics,--Rhode Island, for
instance,--with the tranquillity of the largest, or of the confederated
number, it is obvious that the existence of a federal head keeps down
more quarrels than ever appear.

When the views of the present apprehensive federal party are closely
looked into, they appear to be inconsistent with one or more of the
primary principles of the constitution which we have stated. "The
majority are right." Any fears of the majority are inconsistent with
this maxim, and were always felt by me to be so, from the time I entered
the country till I left it.

One sunny October morning I was taking a drive, with my party, along the
shores of the pretty Owasco Lake, in New York state, and conversing on
the condition of the country with a gentleman who thought the political
prospect less bright than the landscape. I had been less than three
weeks in the country, and was in a state of something like awe at the
prevalence of, not only external competence, but intellectual ability.
The striking effect upon a stranger of witnessing, for the first time,
the absence of poverty, of gross ignorance, of all servility, of all
insolence of manner, cannot be exaggerated in description. I had seen
every man in the towns an independent citizen; every man in the country
a land-owner. I had seen that the villages had their newspapers, the
factory girls their libraries. I had witnessed the controversies between
candidates for office on some difficult subjects, of which the people
were to be the judges. With all these things in my mind, and with every
evidence of prosperity about me in the comfortable homesteads which
every turn in the road, and every reach of the lake, brought into view,
I was thrown into a painful amazement by being told that the grand
question of the time was "whether the people should be encouraged to
govern themselves, or whether the wise should save them from
themselves." The confusion of inconsistencies was here so great as to
defy argument: the patronage among equals that was implied; the
assumption as to who were the wise; and the conclusion that all the rest
must be foolish. This one sentence seemed to be the most extraordinary
combination that could proceed from the lips of a republican.

The expressions of fear vary according to the pursuits, or habits of
mind of those who entertain them: but all are inconsistent with the
theory that the majority are right. One fears the influence in the
national councils of the "Tartar population" of the west, observing that
men retrograde in civilisation when thinly settled in a fruitful
country. But the representatives from these regions will be few while
they are thinly settled, and will be in the minority when in the wrong.
When these representatives become numerous, from the thick settlement of
those regions, their character will have ceased to become Tartar-like
and formidable: even supposing that a Tartar-like character could
co-exist with the commerce of the Mississippi. Another tells me that the
State has been, again and again, "on a lee shore, and a flaw has blown
it off, and postponed the danger; but this cannot go on for ever." The
fact here is true; and it would seem to lead to a directly contrary
inference. "The flaw" is the will of the majority, which might be better
indicated by a figure of something more stable. "The majority is
right." It has thus far preserved the safety of the state; and this is
the best ground for supposing that it will continue to be a safeguard.

One of the most painful apprehensions seems to be that the poorer will
heavily tax the richer members of society; the rich being always a small
class. If it be true, as all parties appear to suppose, that rulers in
general are prone to use their power for selfish purposes, there remains
the alternative, whether the poor shall over-tax the rich, or whether
