The Project Gutenberg eBook of Society in America, Volume 2 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Society in America, Volume 2 (of 2)

Author: Harriet Martineau

Release date: July 31, 2016 [eBook #52685]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Julia Miller, Martin Pettit and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY IN AMERICA, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***

Ann Street, June, 1837.

MESSRS. SAUNDERS AND OTLEY,

HAVE NOW READY THE FOLLOWING

IMPORTANT NEW WORKS.


I.

_Mrs. Butler's New Work._

THE STAR OF SEVILLE,

A DRAMA IN 5 ACTS,

BY MRS. PIERCE BUTLER.
(_Late Miss Fanny Kemble._)


II.

_Mr. Willis's Poems._

MELANIE, AND OTHER POEMS

BY N. P. WILLIS, ESQ.

Illustrated by a beautifully Engraved Portrait.


III.

_Mrs. Jameson's Illustrated Work._

CHARACTERISTICS OF WOMEN:

MORAL, POETICAL AND HISTORICAL.

BY MRS. JAMESON.

Illustrated by a series of her own Vignette Etchings.


IV.

_Lady Blessington's New Work._

THE VICTIMS OF SOCIETY.

BY THE COUNTESS OF BLESSINGTON.


V.

_The Lafayette Papers._

MEMOIRS, CORRESPONDENCE AND OTHER
MANUSCRIPTS OF
GENERAL LAFAYETTE,

_Edited by his Family._

This American Edition will include a series of Letters relating to the
Revolutionary War, not inserted in the London and Paris editions.

(_Nearly Ready._)


VI.

_Mrs. Shelley's New Work._

FALKNER--A NOVEL.
BY MRS. SHELLEY.
Authoress of "Frankenstein," "The Last Man," &c.


VII.

Mr. Dunlap's New Work.

MEMOIRS OF A WATER-DRINKER.
BY WILLIAM DUNLAP, ESQ.
Second Edition, in one vol.


VIII.

_Mr. Grant's New Work._

THE GREAT METROPOLIS.
BY THE AUTHOR OF
"_Random Recollections of the Lords and Commons_," &c

Fourth Edition.


IX.

_Mr. Bulwer's New Drama_:

THE DUCHESS DE LA VALLIERE
_A Play in Five Acts._

Second Edition.


RECENT PUBLICATIONS.


I.

_Miss Landon's New Work._

With a beautiful Portrait of the Author.

THE VOW OF THE PEACOCK.


II.

_Miss Stickney's New Work._

THE POETRY OF LIFE.

By the Author of "Pictures of Private Life."


III.

Third Edition. Bound in Embossed Silk.

THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS

Revised by the Editor of the "Forget-me-Not."

(_With the London colored Plates._)


IV.

THE INFIRMITIES OF GENIUS.

BY DR. MADDEN.


V.

CITATION OF WILLIAM SHAKSPEARE

TOUCHING DEER STEALING.

BY WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, ESQ.


VI.

SONGS OF THE ALHAMBRA.

BY MISS L. B. SMITH.


VII.

MEMOIRS OF MRS. HEMANS,

BY H. F. CHORLEY.

2 vols. beautifully Illustrated.


VIII.

TOPOGRAPHY OF ROME & ITS VICINITY,

BY SIR WM. GELL.

With a Beautiful Map to the above.


IX.

ON CIVILIZATION, &c.

BY THE HON. A. H. MORETON.


X.

ADVENTURES OF A GENTLEMAN

IN SEARCH OF A HORSE.

Illustrated by Cruickshank.


XI.

LUCIEN BONAPARTE'S MEMOIRS

(_Prince of Canino._)

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.


XII.

HAZLITT'S LITERARY REMAINS,

EDITED BY E. L. BULWER, ESQ.

1 vol. with a Portrait.


XIII.

MADRID, IN 1835,

BY AN OFFICER.

With beautiful Plates.


XIV.

THE CONTINENT IN 1835.

BY PROFESSOR HOPPUS.


XV.

SIR GRENVILLE TEMPLE'S NEW WORK

(_Travels in Greece and Turkey._)

2 vols. plates.


XVI.

ADVENTURES IN THE NORTH OF EUROPE

BY EDWARD LANDOR, ESQ.

2 vols. plates.


XVII.

NEW WORK ON FLOWERS.

(_The Floral Telegraph._)

With the London Colored Plates.


XVIII.

TOUR OF A GERMAN ARTIST IN ENGLAND

BY M. PASSAVANT.

2 vols. with Plates.


XIX.

VISIT TO ALEXANDRIA, DAMASCUS AND JERUSALEM,

BY DR. HOGG.

2 vols. Plates.


XX.

RECORDS OF TRAVELS

IN TURKEY, GREECE, &c.:

BY ADOLPHUS SLADE, ESQ.


XXI.

_Captain Glascock's New Work._

THE NAVAL SERVICE.


XXII.

_Mr. Willis's New Work._

INKLINGS OF ADVENTURE.

BY N. P. WILLIS, ESQ.

Third Edition.


XXIII.

THE CHEVY CHACE.

Illustrated in a series of beautiful Etchings.

BY J. FRANKLIN, ESQ.


XXIV.

RETZCH'S FANCIES.

A series of Etchings, with Notes

BY MRS. JAMESON.


XXV.

THE MESSIAH--A POEM.

BY THE REV. J. MONTGOMERY.


_In eight handsomely-printed Volumes, with additional
Notes and Illustrations._

WITH BEAUTIFUL ENGRAVINGS, BY THE FINDENS.

FROM DRAWINGS TAKEN ON THE SPOT, EXPRESSLY FOR THE WORK.

THE LIFE AND WORKS OF COWPER.

THE FIRST AND ONLY COMPLETE AND UNIFORM EDITION.

INCLUDING

THE WHOLE OF HIS PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE.

REVISED, ARRANGED, AND EDITED,

BY THE REV. T. S. GRIMSHAWE,

Author of the "Life of the Rev. Legh Richmond."

WITH

AN ESSAY ON THE GENIUS AND POETRY OF COWPER,

BY THE REV. J. W. CUNNINGHAM.

Vicar of Harrow.

"The works of Cowper need no recommendation; they are incorporated into
our living literature, and will be read as long as men shall read for
amusement, or to gather wisdom, of which no poet is a greater teacher.
The peculiar merit of the present edition is, that it is the only one
which can contain the whole of Cowper's _Private Correspondence_. It
being _copyright_ and _exclusively_ appropriated to this
edition."--_Courier._

"The handsomest specimen of modern standard works that we
have yet seen."--_Monthly Review._

"Of the manner in which this edition has been produced, we can
hardly speak too highly. The type, the embellishments, and the whole
getting up, are excellent. The peculiar facility with which the Editor
has made the poet tell his own story, has stamped upon this edition
an intrinsic value which nothing can surpass."--_Metropolitan._


SPLENDIDLY EMBELLISHED.

THE BOOK OF GEMS.

(_The Poets and Artists of Great Britain._)

WITH UPWARDS OF

FIFTY BEAUTIFUL ENGRAVINGS

FROM

ORIGINAL PICTURES,

BY FIFTY LIVING PAINTERS.

This beautiful Work, which is a perfect novelty among the embellished
publications of the day, presents the combined attractions of
Poetry, Painting, and Engraving. It is splendidly illustrated with upwards
of Fifty exquisitely finished Engravings from Original Pictures
by the most distinguished living Painters, and altogether forms one of
the most beautiful library, drawing-room, and present books which
the advanced state of the Arts has hitherto produced.


_Critical Notices._

"The Book of Gems seems too fair to be looked upon, combining
all those external decorations which made the _Annuals_ so attractive
with something far better than the vapid prose and milk-and-water
poetry of which their staple generally consisted. It is a book more
lovely to the sense than the most gorgeous of the tribe of Souvenirs
and Forget-me-nots; and unlike them, it will be as valuable twenty
years hence as it is now. The very conception of such a book deserves
no little praise, and its execution the very highest. For its
combined attractions to the man of taste and the lover of art, this work
has no rivals in the annals of book making."--_American Monthly Mag._

"This is, in all respects, so beautiful a book, that it would be scarcely
possible to suggest an improvement. Its contents are not for a year,
nor for an age, but for all time."--_Examiner._

"The plan of this beautiful and splendid work is as admirable as it
is novel."--_Literary Gazette._

"This sumptuous book has not less than fifty-three
illustrations."--_Athenæum._

"The Pleasure-book of the year--a treasury of sweets and
beauties."--_Atlas._

A few PROOF IMPRESSIONS OF THE SPLENDID ILLUSTRATIONS
to the above work may still be had.




SOCIETY IN AMERICA

BY

HARRIET MARTINEAU,

AUTHOR OF "ILLUSTRATIONS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY."

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

NEW YORK

SAUNDERS AND OTLEY, ANN STREET,
AND CONDUIT STREET, LONDON.

1837.




CONTENTS.

VOL. II.

PART II.--CHAPTER II.


                                       _Page_
TRANSPORTS AND MARKETS                      1

SECTION I.--Internal Improvements          29


CHAPTER III.

MANUFACTURES                               37
  SECTION I.--The Tariff                   46
         II.--Manufacturing Labor          53


CHAPTER IV.

COMMERCE                                   64
  SECTION I.--The Currency                 76
         II.--Revenue and Expenditure      88


CHAPTER V.

MORALS OF ECONOMY                          92
  SECTION I.--Morals of Slavery           106
         II.--Morals of Manufactures      136
        III.--Morals of Commerce          141


PART III.

CIVILISATION                              149

CHAPTER I.

IDEA OF HONOUR                            155
  SECTION I.--Caste                       168
         II.--Property                    175
        III.--Intercourse                 187

CHAPTER II.

WOMAN                                     226
  SECTION I.--Marriage                    236
         II.--Occupation                  245
        III.--Health                      260

CHAPTER III.

CHILDREN                                  268

CHAPTER IV.

SUFFERERS                                 281

CHAPTER V.

UTTERANCE                                 300


PART IV.

RELIGION                                  314

CHAPTER I.

SCIENCE OF RELIGION                       329

CHAPTER II.

SPIRIT OF RELIGION                        336

CHAPTER III.

ADMINISTRATION OF RELIGION                348

CONCLUSION                                367

APPENDIX                                  373




SOCIETY IN AMERICA.




PART II.

CONTINUED.




CHAPTER II.

TRANSPORT AND MARKETS.

     "Science and Art urge on the useful toil;
     New mould a climate, and create the soil.
     On yielding Nature urge their new demands,
     And ask not gifts, but tribute, at her hands."

     _Barbauld._


Nature has done so much for the United States in this article of their
economy, and has indicated so clearly what remained for human hands to
do, that it is very comprehensible to the traveller why this new country
so far transcends others of the same age in markets and means of
transport. The ports of the United States are, singularly enough,
scattered round the whole of their boundaries. Besides those on the
seaboard, there are many in the interior; on the northern lakes, and on
thousands of miles of deep rivers. No nook in the country is at a
despairing distance from a market; and where the usual incentives to
enterprise exist, the means of transport are sure to be provided, in the
proportion in which they are wanted.

Even in the south, where, the element of wages being lost, and the will
of the labourer being lost with them, there are no adequate means of
executing even the best-conceived enterprises,[1] more has been done
than could have been expected under the circumstances. The mail roads
are still extremely bad. I found, in travelling through the Carolinas
and Georgia, that the drivers consider themselves entitled to get on by
any means they can devise: that nobody helps and nobody hinders them. It
was constantly happening that the stage came to a stop on the brink of a
wide and a deep puddle, extending all across the road. The driver helped
himself, without scruple, to as many rails of the nearest fence as might
serve to fill up the bottom of the hole, or break our descent into it.
On inquiry, I found it was not probable that either road or fence would
be mended till both had gone to absolute destruction.

The traffic on these roads is so small, that the stranger feels himself
almost lost in the wilderness. In the course of several days' journey,
we saw, (with the exception of the wagons of a few encampments,) only
one vehicle besides our own. It was a stage returning from Charleston.
Our meeting in the forest was like the meeting of ships at sea. We asked
the passengers from the south for news from Charleston and Europe; and
they questioned us about the state of politics at Washington. The eager
vociferation of drivers and passengers was such as is very unusual, out
of exile. We were desired to give up all thoughts of going by the
eastern road to Charleston. The road might be called impassable; and
there was nothing to eat by the way. So we described a circuit, by
Camden and Columbia.

An account of an actual day's journey will give the best idea of what
travelling is in such places. We had travelled from Richmond, Virginia,
the day before, (March 2nd, 1835,) and had not had any rest, when, at
midnight, we came to a river which had no bridge. The "scow" had gone
over with another stage, and we stood under the stars for a long time;
hardly less than an hour. The scow was only just large enough to hold
the coach and ourselves; so that it was thought safest for the
passengers to alight, and go on board on foot. In this process, I found
myself over the ankles in mud. A few minutes after we had driven on
again, on the opposite side of the river, we had to get out to change
coaches; after which we proceeded, without accident, though very slowly,
till daylight. Then the stage sank down into a deep rut, and the horses
struggled in vain. We were informed that we were "mired," and must all
get out. I stood for some time to witness what is very pretty for once;
but wearisome when it occurs ten times a day. The driver carries an axe,
as a part of the stage apparatus. He cuts down a young tree, for a
lever, which is introduced under the nave of the sunken wheel; a log
serving for a block. The gentleman passengers all help; shouting to the
horses, which tug and scramble as vigorously as the gentlemen. We ladies
sometimes gave our humble assistance by blowing the driver's horn.
Sometimes a cluster of negroes would assemble from a neighbouring
plantation; and in extreme cases, they would bring a horse, to add to
our team. The rescue from the rut was effected in any time from a
quarter of an hour to two hours. This particular 3rd of March, two hours
were lost by this first mishap. It was very cold, and I walked on alone,
sure of not missing my road in a region where there was no other. When I
had proceeded two miles, I stopped and looked around me. I was on a
rising ground, with no object whatever visible but the wild, black
forest, extending on all sides as far as I could see, and the red road
cut through it, as straight as an arrow, till it was lost behind a
rising ground at either extremity. I know nothing like it, except a
Salvator Rosa I once saw. The stage soon after took me up, and we
proceeded fourteen miles to breakfast. We were faint with hunger; but
there was no refreshment for us. The family breakfast had been long
over, and there was not a scrap of food in the house. We proceeded, till
at one o'clock we reached a private dwelling, where the good woman was
kind enough to provide dinner for us, though the family had dined. She
gave us a comfortable meal, and charged only a quarter dollar each. She
stands in all the party's books as a hospitable dame.

We had no sooner left her house than we had to get out to pass on foot a
bridge too crazy for us to venture over it in the carriage. Half a mile
before reaching the place where we were to have tea, the thorough-brace
broke, and we had to walk through a snow shower to the inn. We had not
proceeded above a quarter of a mile from this place when the traces
broke. After this, we were allowed to sit still in the carriage till
near seven in the morning, when we were approaching Raleigh, North
Carolina. We then saw a carriage "mired" and deserted by driver and
horses, but tenanted by some travellers who had been waiting there since
eight the evening before. While we were pitying their fate, our vehicle
once more sank into a rut. It was, however, extricated in a short time,
and we reached Raleigh in safety.

It was worth undergoing a few travelling disasters to witness the skill
and temper of the drivers, and the inexhaustible good-nature of the
passengers. Men of business in any other part of the world would be
visibly annoyed by such delays as I have described; but in America I
never saw any gentleman's temper give way under these accidents. Every
one jumps out in a moment, and sets to work to help the driver; every
one has his joke, and, when it is over, the ladies are sure to have the
whole represented to them in its most amusing light. One driver on this
journey seemed to be a novice, or in some way inferior in confidence to
the rest. A gentleman of our party chose to sit beside him on the box;
and he declared that the driver shut his eyes when we were coming to a
hole; and that when he called piteously on the passengers for help, it
was because we were taking aim at a deep rut. Usually, the confidence
and skill of the drivers were equally remarkable. If they thought the
stage more full than was convenient, they would sometimes try to alarm
the passengers, so as to induce some of them to remain for the next
stage; and it happened two or three times that a fat passenger or two
fell into the trap, and declined proceeding; but it was easy for the
experienced to see that the alarm was feigned. In such cases, after a
splash into water, in the dark, news would be heard from the box that
we were in the middle of a creek, and could not go a step, back or
forward, without being overturned into the water. Though the assertion
was disproved the next minute, it produced its effect. Again, when the
moon was going down early, and the lamps were found to be, of course,
out of order, and the gentlemen insisted on buying candles by the
road-side, and walking on in bad places, each with a tallow light in his
hand, the driver would let drop that, as we had to be overturned before
dawn, it did not much matter whether it was now or later. After this,
the stoutest of the company were naturally left behind at the next
stopping-place, and the driver chuckled at the lightening of his load.

At the close of a troublesome journey in the south, we drew up, with
some noise, before a hotel, at three in the morning. The driver blew a
blast upon an execrable horn. Nobody seemed stirring. Slaves are the
most slow-moving people in the world, except upon occasion.

"What sleepy folks they are here!" exclaimed the driver.

Another blast on the horn, long and screeching.

"Never saw such people for sleeping. Music has no effect on 'em at all.
I shall have to try fire-arms."

Another blast.

"We've waked the watchman, however. That's something done."

Another blast.

"Never knew such people. Why, Lazarus was far easier to raise."

The best testimony that I can bear to the skill with which travelling is
conducted on such roads as these, and also in steam-boats, is the fact
that I travelled upwards of ten thousand miles in the United States, by
land and water, without accident. I was twice nearly overturned; but
never quite.

It has been seen what the mail routes are like in the south; and I have
mentioned that greater progress has been made in other means of
transport than might have been expected. I referred to the new
rail-roads which are being opened in various directions. I saw few
circumstances in the south with which I was so well pleased. By the free
communication which will thus be opened, much sectional prejudice will
be dispelled: the inferiority of slave to free labour will be the more
speedily brought home to every man's convictions; and new settlers,
abhorring slavery, will come in and mix with the present population; be
the laws regarding labour what they may.

The only rail-roads completed in the south, when I was there, were the
Charleston and Augusta one, two short ones in the States of Alabama and
Mississippi, and one of five miles from Lake Pontchartrain to New
Orleans. There is likely to be soon a magnificent line from Charleston
to Cincinnati; and the line from Norfolk, Virginia, to New York, is now
almost uninterrupted.

The quarter of an hour employed in reaching New Orleans from Lake
Pontchartrain was one of the most delightful seasons in all my travels.
My notion of a swamp was corrected for ever. It was the end of April;
and the flowering reeds and tropical shrubs made the whole scene one gay
garden. It was odd to be passing through a gay garden on a rail-road.
Green cypress grew out of the clear water everywhere; and there were
acres of blue and white iris; and a thousand rich, unknown blossoms
waving over the pools. A negro here and there emerged from a flowery
thicket, pushing himself on a raft, or in a canoe, through the reeds.
The sluggish bayou was on one side; and here and there, a group of old
French houses on the other. It was like skimming, as one does in dreams,
over the meadows of Sicily, or the plains of Ceylon.

That which may be seen on either hand of the Charleston and Augusta
rail-road is scarcely less beautiful; but my journeys on it were by far
the most fatiguing of any I underwent in the country. The motion and the
noise are distracting. Whether this is owing to its being built on
piles, in many places; whether the fault is in the ground or the
construction, I do not know. Almost all the rail-road travelling in
America is very fatiguing and noisy. I was told that this was chiefly
owing to the roads being put to use as soon as finished, instead of the
work being left to settle for some months. How far this is true, I do
not pretend to say. The rail-roads which I saw in progress were laid on
wood instead of stone. The patentee discovered that wood settles after
frost more evenly than stone. The original cost, in the State of New
York, is about two thousand dollars per mile.

One great inconvenience of the American rail-roads is that, from wood
being used for fuel, there is an incessant shower of large sparks,
destructive to dress and comfort, unless all the windows are shut; which
is impossible in warm weather. Some serious accidents from fire have
happened in this way; and, during my last trip on the Columbia and
Philadelphia rail-road, a lady in the car had a shawl burned to
destruction on her shoulders; and I found that my own gown had thirteen
holes in it; and my veil, with which I saved my eyes, more than could be
counted.

My first trip on the Charleston rail-road was more amusing than
prosperous. The arrangements were scarcely completed, and the apparatus
was then in a raw state. Our party left Columbia at seven in the evening
of the 9th of March, by stage, hoping to meet the rail-road train at
Branchville, sixty miles from Columbia, at eleven the next morning, and
to reach Charleston, sixty-two more, to dinner. Towards morning, when
the moon had set, the stage bumped against something; and the driver
declared that he must wait for the day-spring, before he could proceed
another step. When the dawn brightened, we found that we had, as we
supposed, missed our passage by the train, for the sake of a stump about
two inches above the ground. We hastened breakfast at Orangeburg; and
when we got to Branchville, found we need have been in no hurry. The
train had not arrived; and, some little accident having happened, we
waited for it till near two o'clock.

I never saw an economical work of art harmonise so well with the
vastness of a natural scene, as here. From the piazza of the house at
Branchville, the forest fills the whole scene, with the rail-road
stretching through it, in a perfectly straight line, to the vanishing
point. The approaching train cannot be seen so far off as this. When it
appears, a black dot, marked by its wreath of smoke, it is impossible to
avoid watching it, growing and self-moving, till it stops before the
door. I cannot draw; but I could not help trying to make a sketch of
this, the largest and longest perspective I ever saw. We were well
employed for two hours in basking in the sun, noting the
mock-orange-trees before the house, the turkeys strutting, the robins
(twice as large as the English) hopping and flitting; and the house,
apparently just piled up of wood just cut from the forest. Everything
was as new as the rail-road. As it turned out, we should have been
better employed in dining; but we had no other idea than of reaching
Charleston in three or four hours.

For the first thirty-five miles, which we accomplished by half-past
four, we called it the most interesting rail-road we had ever been on.
The whole sixty-two miles was almost a dead level, the descent being
only two feet. Where pools, creeks, and gullies had to be passed, the
road was elevated on piles, and thence the look down on an expanse of
evergreens was beautiful. This is, probably, the reason why three
gentlemen went, a few days afterwards, to walk, of all places, on the
rail-road. When they were in the middle of one of these elevated
portions, where there is a width of only about three inches on either
side the tracks, they heard a shout, and looking back, saw a train
coming upon them with such speed as to leave no hope that it could be
stopped before it reached them. There was no alternative; all three
leaped down, upwards of twenty feet, into the swamp, and escaped with a
wetting, and with looking exceedingly foolish in their own eyes.

At half-past four, our boiler sprang a leak, and there was an end of our
prosperity. In two hours, we hungry passengers were consoled with the
news that it was mended. But the same thing happened, again and again;
and always in the middle of a swamp, where we could do nothing but sit
still. The gentlemen tried to amuse themselves with frog-hunting: but it
was a poor resource. Once we stopped before a comfortable-looking house,
where a hot supper was actually on the table; but we were not allowed to
stop, even so long as to get out. The gentlemen made a rush into the
house to see what they could get. One carried off a chicken entire, for
his party; another seized part of a turkey. Our gentlemen were not alert
enough. The old lady's table was cleared too quickly for them, and
quite to her own consternation. All that we, a party of five, had to
support us, was some strips of ham, pieces of dry bread, and three sweet
potatoes, all jumbled together in a handkerchief. Our thoughts wandered
back to this supper-table, an hour after, when we were again sticking in
the middle of a swamp. I had fallen asleep, (for it was now the middle
of a second night of travelling,) and was awakened by such a din as I
had never heard. I could not recollect where I was; I looked out of the
window, and saw, by the light of the moon, white houses on the bank of
the swamp, and the waving shrubs of the forest; but the distracting din
was like nothing earthly. It presently struck me that we were being
treated with a frog-concert. It is worth hearing, for once, anything so
unparalleled as the knocking, ticking, creaking, and rattling, in every
variety of key. The swamp was as thick of noises as the forest is of
leaves: but, five minutes of the concert are enough; while a hundred
years are not enough of the forest. After many times stopping and
proceeding, we arrived at Charleston between four and five in the
morning; and, it being too early to disturb our friends, crept cold and
weary to bed, at the Planters' Hotel. It was well that all this happened
in the month of March. Three months later, such detention in the swamps
by night might have been the death of three-fourths of the passengers. I
have not heard of any mismanagement since the concern has been put
fairly in operation.

There are many rail-roads in Virginia, and a line to New York, through
Maryland and Delaware. There is in Kentucky a line from Louisville to
Lexington. But it is in Pennsylvania, New York, Rhode Island, and
Massachusetts, that they abound. All have succeeded so admirably, that
there is no doubt of the establishment of this means of communication
over nearly the whole of the United States, within a few years, as
by-ways to the great high-ways which Nature has made to run through this
vast country. The evil of a superabundance of land in proportion to
labour will thus be lessened so far, that there will be an economy of
time, and a facility of intercourse, which will improve the intelligence
of the country population. There will, also, be a facility of finding
out where new supplies of labour are most wanted, and of supplying them.
By advantageous employment for small capitals being thus offered within
bounds, it may also be hoped that many will be prevented from straying
into the wilderness. The best friends of the moral as well as economical
interests of the Americans, will afford all possible encouragement to
wise schemes for the promotion of intercourse, especially between the
north and south.

I believe the best-constructed rail-road in the States is the Boston and
Lowell, Massachusetts: length, twenty-five miles. Its importance, from
the amount of traffic upon it, may be estimated from the fact that some
thousands of dollars were spent, the winter after it was opened, in
clearing away a fall of snow from it. It was again covered, the next
night.

Another line from Boston is to Providence, Rhode Island, forty-three
miles long. This opens a very speedy communication with New York; the
distance, two hundred and twenty-seven miles, being performed in twenty
hours, by rail-road and steam-boat.

There is a good line from Boston to Worcester; forty-five miles in
length. Its estimated cost is 883,904 dollars. This road is to be
carried on across the entire State, to the Connecticut; from whence a
line is now in course of construction to the Hudson, to issue opposite
Albany. There are proposals for a tunnel under the Hudson at Albany;
and from Albany, there is already canal and rail-road communication to
Lake Erie. There is now an uninterrupted communication from the Atlantic
to the far end of Lake Michigan. It only remains to extend a line thence
to the Mississippi, and the circle is complete.

The great Erie canal, intersecting the whole State of New York, is too
celebrated to need much notice here. Its entire length is three hundred
and sixty-three miles. It is forty feet wide at top, twenty-eight at
bottom, and four feet deep. There are eighty-four locks on the main
canal. The total rise and fall is six hundred and ninety-two feet. The
cost was 9,500,000 dollars. Though this canal has been opened only since
1825, it is found already insufficient for the immense commerce carried
on between the European world and the great West, through the eastern
ports. There is a rail-road now running across the entire State, which
is expected to exhibit much more traffic than the canal, without at all
interfering with its business.

I traversed the valley of the Mohawk twice; the first time by the canal,
the next by stage, which I much preferred, both on account of the views
being better from the high-road, and from the discomfort of the
canal-boats. I had also the opportunity of observing the courses of the
canal and the new rail-road throughout.

I was amused, the first time, at hearing some gentlemen plan how the bed
of the shoaly Mohawk might be deepened, so as to admit the passage of
steam-boats. It would be nearly as easy to dig a river at once for the
purpose, and pump it full; in other words, to make another canal, twice
as wonderful as the present. The rail-road is a better scheme by far. In
winter the traffic is continued by sleighs on the canal ice: and a
pretty sight it must be.

The aspect of the valley was really beautiful last June. It must have
made the Mohawk Indians heart-sore to part with it in its former quiet
state; but now there is more beauty, as well as more life. There are
farms, in every stage of advancement, with all the stir of life about
them; and the still, green graveyard belonging to each, showing its
white palings and tombstones on the hill-side, near at hand. Sometimes a
small space in the orchard is railed in for this purpose. In a shallow
reach of the river there was a line of cows wading through, to bury
themselves in the luxuriant pasture of the islands in the midst of the
Mohawk. In a deeper part, the chain ferry-boat slowly conveyed its
passengers across. The soil of the valley is remarkably rich, and the
trees and verdure unusually fine. The hanging oak-woods on the ridge
were beautiful; and the knolls, tilled or untilled; and the little
waterfalls trickling or leaping down, to join the rushing river. Little
knots of houses were clustered about the locks and bridges of the canal;
and here and there a village, with its white church conspicuous, spread
away into the middle of the narrow valley. The green and white canal
boats might be seen stealing along under the opposite ridge, or issuing
from behind a clump of elms or birches, or gliding along a graceful
aqueduct, with the diminished figures of the walking passengers seen
moving along the bank. On the other hand, the rail-road skirted the base
of the ridge, and the shanties of the Irish labourers, roofed with turf,
and the smoke issuing from a barrel at one corner, were so grouped as to
look picturesque, however little comfortable. In some of the narrowest
passes of the valley, the high road, the rail-road, the canal, and the
river, are all brought close together, and look as if they were trying
which could escape first into a larger space. The scene at Little Falls
is magnificent, viewed from the road, in the light of a summers'
morning. The carrying the canal and rail-road through this pass was a
grand idea; and the solidity and beauty of the works are worthy of it.

The canal was commenced in 1817; and the first boat from the inland
lakes arrived at New York on the 4th of November 1825. The first year's
revenue amounted to 566,221 dollars. In 1836, the tolls amounted to
1,294,649 dollars.

The incorporated rail-road companies in the State of New York in 1836
were fifty; their capitals varying from fifteen thousand to ten million
dollars.

When I first crossed the Alleghanies, in November 1834, I caught a
glimpse of the stupendous Portage rail-road, running between the two
canals which reach the opposite bases of the mountains. The stage in
which I travelled was on one side of a deep ravine, bristling with
pines; while on the other side was the lofty embankment, such a wall as
I had never imagined could be built, on the summit of which ran the
rail-road, its line traceable for some miles, with frequent stations and
trains of baggage-cars. One track of this road had not long been opened;
and the work was a splendid novelty. I had afterwards the pleasure of
travelling on it, from end to end.

This road is upwards of thirty-six miles in length, and at one point
