The Project Gutenberg eBook of The lesser Key of Solomon, Goetia, the book of evil spirits
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The lesser Key of Solomon, Goetia, the book of evil spirits
        contains two hundred diagrams and seals for invocation and convocation of spirits, necromancy, witchcraft and black art

Editor: L. W. De Laurence

Release date: January 11, 2024 [eBook #72679]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: de Laurence, Scott & Co, 1916

Credits: deaurider, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LESSER KEY OF SOLOMON, GOETIA, THE BOOK OF EVIL SPIRITS ***


                       The Lesser Key of Solomon




                       The Lesser Key Of Solomon

                                 GOETIA
                        The Book Of Evil Spirits

                   CONTAINS TWO HUNDRED DIAGRAMS AND
                  SEALS FOR INVOCATION AND CONVOCATION
                        OF SPIRITS. NECROMANCY,
                             WITCHCRAFT AND
                               BLACK ART.

                  TRANSLATED FROM ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS
                     IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM, LONDON

                            Ceremonial Magic

                    _Only Authorized Edition Extant_

                   Published Under The Editorship Of
                           L. W. de Laurence

                     Member Of The Eastern Order Of
                            Sacred Mysteries

                              DE LAURENCE
                                Chicago




                            Copyright, 1916
                                   By
                        de LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO.


                             SPECIAL NOTICE

          The illustrations, cover design and contents of this
           Volume are protected by copyright, and must not be
          reproduced or copied without written permission from
                            the Publishers.

         Disregard of this warning will subject the offender to
                      the penalty provided by law.




                                 Goetia

                           The Lesser Key Of
                              King Solomon




ΕΠΙΚΑΛΟΥΜΑΙ ΣΕ ΤΟΝ ΕΝ ΤΩ ΚΕΝΕΩ ΠΝΕΥΜΑΤΙ, ΔΕΙΝΟΝ, ΑΟΡΑΤΟΝ, ΠΑΝΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΑ.
ΘΕΟΝ ΘΕΩΝ, ΦΘΕΡΟΠΟΙΟΝ, ΚΑΙ ΕΡΗΜΟΠΟΙΟΝ, Ο ΜΙΣΩΝ ΟΙΚΙΑΝ ΕYΣΤΑΘΟΥΣΑΝ, ΩΣ
ΕΞΕΒΡΑΣΘΗΣ ΕΚ ΤΗΣ ΑΙΓΥΠΤΙΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΕΞΩ ΧΩΡΑΣ.

ΕΠΟΝΟΜΑΣΘΗΣ Ο ΠΑΝΤΑ ΡΗΣΣΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΜΗ ΝΙΚΩΜΕΝΟΣ.

ΕΠΙΚΑΛΟΥΜΑΙ ΣΕ ΤΥΦΩΝ ΣΗΘ ΤΑΣ ΣΑΣ ΜΑΝΤΕΙΑΣ ΕΠΙΤΕΛΩ, ΟΤΙ ΕΠΙΚΑΛΟΥΜΑΙ ΣΕ ΤΟ
ΣΟΝ ΑΥΘΕΝΤΙΚΟΝ ΣΟΤ ΟΝΟΜΑ ΕΝ ΟΙΣ ΟΥ ΔΥΝΗ ΠΑΡΑΚΟΥΣΑΙ ΙΩΕΡΒΗΘ, ΙΩΠΑΚΕΡΒΗΟ,
ΙΩΒΟΛΧΩΣΗΘ, ΙΩΠΑΤΑΘΝΑΞ, ΙΩΣΩΡΩ, ΙΩΝΕΒΟΥΤΟΣΟΥΑΛΗΘ, ΑΚΤΙΩΦΙ, ΕΡΕΣΧΙΓΑΛ,
ΝΕΒΟΠΟΩΑΛΗΘ, ΑΒΕΡΑΜΕΝΘΩΟΝ, ΛΕΡΘΕΞΑΝΑΞ, ΕΘΡΕΛΥΩΘ, ΝΕΜΑΡΕΒΑ, ΑΕΜΙΝΑ, ΟΛΟΝ
ΗΚΕ ΜΟΙ ΚΑΙ ΒΑΔΙΣΟΝ ΚΑΙ ΚΑΤΕΒΑΛΕ ΤΟΝ ΔΕΙΝΟΝ ΜΑΘΕΡΣ. ΡΙΓΕΙ ΚΑΙ ΠΥΡΕΙΩ
ΑΥΤΟΣ ΗΔΙΚΗΣΕΝ ΤΟΝ ΑΝΘΡΩΠΟΝ ΚΑΙ ΤΟ ΑΙΜA ΤΟΥ ΦΥΩΝΟΣ ΕΞΕΧΥΣΕΝ ΠΛΡ’ ΕΑΥΤΩ.

ΔΙΑ ΤΟΥΤΟ ΤΑΥΤΑ ΠΟΙΕΩ ΚΟΙΝΑ.




                                Preface.


This translation of the FIRST BOOK of the “_Lemegeton_” which is now for
the first time made accessible to students of TALISMANIC MAGIC was done,
after careful collation and edition, from numerous _Ancient Manuscripts_
in _Hebrew_, _Latin_, and _French_, by G. H. _Fra._ D.D.C.F., by the
order of the _Secret Chief_ of the _Rosicrucian Order_.[1] The G. H.
_Fra._, having succumbed unhappily to the assaults of the _Four Great
Princes_ (acting notably under Martial influences), it seemed expedient
that the work should be brought to its conclusion by another hand. The
investigation of a competent Skryer into the house of our unhappy
_Fra._, confirmed this divination; neither our _Fra._ nor his _Hermetic
Mul._ were there seen; but only the terrible shapes of the evil _Adepts_
S.V.A.[2] and H., whose original bodies having been sequestered by
Justice, were no longer of use to them. On this we stayed no longer Our
Hand; but withdrawing Ourselves, and consulting the Rota, and the Books
M. and Q. did decide to ask Mr. Aleister Crowley, a poet, and skilled
student of _Magical Lore_, and an expert _Kabbalist_, to complete openly
that which had been begun in secret.[3] This is that which is written:
“His Bishoprick let another take.” And again: “_Oculi Tetragammaton_.”
This is also that which is said: “Nomen Secundum refertur ad _Gebhurah_;
qui est _Rex Bittul_ atque Corruptio _Achurajim Patris et Matris_ hoc
indigitatur.”

And so saying we wish you well.

    _Ex Deo Nascimur._
    _In Jesu Morimur._
    _Per S.S. Reviviscimus._

Given forth from our Mountain of A., this day of C.C. 1903 A. D.

Footnote 1:

  _Mr. A. E. Waite_ writes (“_Real History Of The Rosicrucians_,” p.
  426): “I beg leave to warn my readers that all persons who proclaim
  themselves to be _Rosicrucians_ are simply members of
  pseudo-fraternities, and that there is that difference between their
  assertion and the fact of the case in which the essence of a lie
  consists!” It is within the _Editor’s_ personal knowledge that Mr.
  Waite was (and still is probably) a member of a society claiming to be
  the R.C. fraternity. As _Mr. Waite_ constantly hints in his writing
  that he is in touch with initiated centres, I think the _syllogism_,
  whose premises are given above, is fair, if not quite formal.—ED.

Footnote 2:

  It was owing to our _Fra._ receiving this S.V.A. as his Superior, and
  giving up the _Arcana_ of our _Fraternity_ into so unhallowed a power,
  that We decided no longer to leave Our dignity and authority in the
  hands of one who could be thus easily imposed upon. (For by a childish
  and easy magical trick did S.V.A. persuade D.D.C.F. of that lie.)

Footnote 3:

  He that is appointed to complete in secret that which had been begun
  openly is R.R., and to be heard of at the care of the Editor.




                        PRELIMINARY INVOCATION.


     _Thee I invoke, the Bornless one.
     Thee, that didst create the Earth and the Heavens:
     Thee, that didst create the Night and the Day.
     Thee, that didst create the Darkness and the Light.
     Thou art Osorronophris: Whom no man has seen at any time.
     Thou art Jäbas
     Thou art Jäpōs:
     Thou hast distinguished between the Just and the Unjust.
     Thou didst make the Female and the Male.
     Thou didst produce the Seed and the Fruit.
     Thou didst form Men to love one another, and to hate one another._

_I am Mosheh Thy Prophet, unto Whom Thou didst commit Thy Mysteries, the
Ceremonies of Ishrael:_

_Thou didst produce the moist and the dry, and that which nourisheth all
created Life._

_Hear Thou Me, for I am the Angel of Paphrō Osorronophris: this is Thy
True Name, handed down to the Prophets of Ishrael._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Hear Me:_—

_Ar: Thiao: Rheibet: Atheleberseth:_

_A: Blatha: Abeu: Ebeu: Phi:_

_Thitasoe: Ib: Thiao._

_Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether; upon the Earth and under the Earth: on
dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and
every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_I invoke Thee, the Terrible and Invisible God: Who dwellest in the Void
Place of the Spirit:_—

_Arogogorobraō: Sothou:_

_Modoriō: Phalarthaō: Döö: Apé, The Bornless One:_

_Hear Me: etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Hear me:_—

_Roubriaō: Mariōdam: Balbnabaoth: Assalonai: Aphniaō: I: Thoteth:
Abrasar: Aëöōü: Ischure, Mighty and Bornless One!_

_Hear me: etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_I invoke thee:_—

                        _Ma: Barraiō: Jōēl: Kotha:_
                        _Athorēbalō: Abraoth:_

_Hear Me: etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     _Hear me!
                     Aōth: Abaōth: Basum: Isak:
                     Sabaoth: Iao:_

                     _This is the Lord of the Gods:
                     This is the Lord of the Universe:
                     This is He Whom the Winds fear._

_This is He, Who having made Voice by His Commandment, is Lord of All
Things; King, Ruler and Helper._

_Hear Me, etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Hear Me:_—

_Ieou: Pūr: Iou: Pūr: Iaōt: Iaeō: Ioou: Abrasar: Sabriam: Do: Uu:
Adonaie: Ede: Edu: Angelos ton Theon: Aniaia Lai: Gaia: Ape: Diathanna
Thorun._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_I am He! the Bornless Spirit! having sight in the feet: Strong, and the
Immortal Fire!_

_I am He! the Truth!_

_I am He! Who hate that evil should be wrought in the World!_

_I am He, that lighteneth and thundereth._

_I am He, from Whom is the Shower of the Life of Earth:_

_I am He, Whose mouth ever flameth:_

_I am He, the Begetter and Manifester unto the Light:_

_I am He; the Grace of the World:_

                  *       *       *       *       *

_“The Heart Girt with a Serpent” is My Name!_

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Come Thou forth, and follow Me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me so
that every Spirit of the Firmament, and of the Ether: upon the Earth and
under the Earth: on dry Land, or in the Water: of whirling Air or of
rushing Fire: and every Spell and Scourge of God, may be obedient unto
me!_

                           _Iao: Sabao:_

                           _Such are the Words!_




                                 Goetia
                       The Lesser Key Of Solomon
           THE INITIATED INTERPRETATION OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC.


It is loftily amusing to the student of _Magical_ literature who is not
quite a fool—and rare is such a combination!—to note the criticism
directed by the Philistine against the citadel of his science. Truly,
since our childhood has ingrained into us not only literal belief in the
Bible, but also substantial belief in _Alf Laylah_ wa _Laylah_, and only
adolescence can cure us, we are only too liable, in the rush and energy
of dawning manhood, to overturn roughly and rashly both these classics,
to regard them both on the same level, as interesting documents from the
standpoint of folk-lore and anthropology, and as nothing more.

Even when we learn that the Bible, by a profound and minute study of the
text, may be forced to yield up _Qabalistic_ arcana of cosmic scope and
importance, we are too often slow to apply a similar restorative to the
companion volume, even if we are the luck holders of Burton’s veritable
edition.

To me, then, it remains to raise the _Alf Laylah_ wa Laylah into its
proper place once more.

I am not concerned to deny the objective reality of all “_magical_”
phenomena; if they are illusions, they are at least as real as many
unquestioned facts of daily life; and, if we follow Herbert Spencer,
they are at least evidence of some cause.[4]

Now, this fact is our base. What is the cause of my illusion of seeing a
spirit in the triangle of Art?

Every smatterer, every expert in psychology, will answer: “That cause
lies in your brain.”

English children (_pace_ the Education Act) are taught that the Universe
lies in infinite Space; Hindu children, in the Akasa, which is the same
thing.

Those Europeans who go a little deeper learn from Fichte, that the
phenomenal Universe is the creation of the Ego; Hindus, or Europeans
studying under Hindu Gurus, are told, that by Akasa is meant the
Chitakasa. The Chitakasa is situated in the “Third Eye”, _i.e._, in the
brain. By assuming higher dimensions of space, we can assimilate this
fact to Realism; but we have no need to take so much trouble.

This being true for the ordinary Universe, that all sense-impressions
are dependent on changes in the brain,[5] we must include illusions,
which are after all sense-impressions as much as “realities” are, in the
class of “phenomena dependent on brain-changes.”

Magical phenomena, however, come under a special sub-class, since they
are willed, and their cause is the series of “real” phenomena called the
operations of ceremonial Magic.

These consist of

    (1) Sight.

    The circle, square, triangle, vessels, lamps, robes, implements,
    etc.

    (2) Sound.

    The invocations.

    (3) Smell.

    The perfumes.

    (4) Taste.

    The Sacraments.

    (5) Touch.

    As under (1).

    (6) Mind.

    The combination of all these and reflection on their significance.

These unusual impressions (1-5) produce unusual brain-changes; hence
their summary (6) is of unusual kind. Its projection back into the
apparently phenomenal world is therefore unusual.

Herein then consists the reality of the operations and effects of
ceremonial magic,[6] and I conceive that the apology is ample, as far as
the “effects” refer only to those phenomena which appear to the magician
himself, the appearance of the spirit, his conversation, possible shocks
from imprudence, and so on, even to ecstasy on the one hand, and death
or madness on the other.

But can any of the effects described in this our book Goetia be
obtained, and if so, can you give a rational explanation of the
circumstances? Say you so?

I can, and will.

The spirits of the Goetia are portions of the human brain.

Their seals therefore represent (Mr. Spencer’s projected cube) methods
of stimulating or regulating those particular spots (through the eye).

The names of God are vibrations calculated to establish:

(_a_) General control of the brain. (Establishment of functions relative
to the subtle world.)

(_b_) Control over the brain in detail. (Rank or type of the Spirit.)

(_c_) Control of one special portion. (Name of the Spirit.)

The perfumes aid this through smell. Usually the perfume will only tend
to control a large area; but there is an attribution of perfumes to
letters of the alphabet enabling one, by a Qabalistic formula, to spell
out the Spirit’s name.

I need not enter into more particular discussion of these points; the
intelligent reader can easily fill in what is lacking.

If, then, I say, with Solomon:

“The Spirit Cimieries teaches logic,” what I mean is:

“Those portions of my brain which subserve the logical faculty may be
stimulated and developed by following out the processes called ‘The
Invocation of Cimieries.’”

And this is a purely materialistic rational statement; it is independent
of any objective hierarchy at all. Philosophy has nothing to say; and
Science can only suspend judgment, pending a proper and methodical
investigation of the facts alleged.

Unfortunately, we cannot stop there. Solomon promises us that we can (1)
obtain information; (2) destroy our enemies; (3) understand the voices
of nature; (4) obtain treasure; (5) heal diseases, etc. I have taken
these five powers at random; considerations of space forbid me to
explain all.

(1) Brings up facts from sub-consciousness.

(2) Here we come to an interesting fact. It is curious to note the
contrast between the noble means and the apparently vile ends of magical
rituals. The latter are disguises for sublime truths. “To destroy our
enemies” is to realize the illusion of duality, to excite compassion.

(Ah! Mr. Waite, the world of Magic is a mirror, wherein who sees muck is
muck.)

(3) A careful naturalist will understand much from the voices of the
animals he has studied long. Even a child knows the difference of a
cat’s miauling and purring. The faculty may be greatly developed.

(4) Business capacity may be stimulated.

(5) Abnormal states of the body may be corrected, and the involved
tissues brought back to tone, in obedience to currents started from the
brain.

So for all other phenomena. There is no effect which is truly and
necessarily miraculous.

Our Ceremonial Magic fines down, then, to a series of minute, though of
course empirical, physiological experiments, and whoso will carry them
through intelligently need not fear the result.

I have all the health, and treasure, and logic, I need; I have no time
to waste. “There is a lion in the way.” For me these practices are
useless; but for the benefit of others less fortunate I give them to the
world, together with this explanation of, and apology for, them.

I trust that the explanation will enable many students who have
hitherto, by a puerile objectivity in their view of the question,
obtained no results, to succeed; that the apology may impress upon our
scornful men of science that the study of the bacillus should give place
to that of the baculum, the little to the great—how great one only
realizes when one identifies the wand with the Mahalingam, up which
Brahma flew at the rate of 84,000 yojanas a second for 84,000
mahakalpas, down which Vishnu flew at the rate of 84,000 croces of
yojanas a second for 84,000 crores of mahakalpas—yet neither reached an
end.

But I reach an end.

                             _Boleskine House,
                             Foyers, N.B._

Footnote 4:

  This, incidentally, is perhaps the greatest argument we possess,
  pushed to its extreme, against the Advaitist theories.

Footnote 5:

  Thought is a secretion of the brain (Weissmann). Consciousness is a
  function of the brain (Huxley).

Footnote 6:

  Apart from its value in obtaining one-pointedness.




                    PRELIMINARY DEFINITION OF MAGIC.
                LEMEGETON VEL CLAVICULA SALOMONIS REGIS.


Magic is the Highest, most Absolute, and most Divine Knowledge of
Natural Philosophy,[7] advanced in its works and wonderful operations by
a right understanding of the inward and occult virtue of things; so that
true Agents[8] being applied to proper Patients,[9] strange and
admirable effects will thereby be produced. Whence magicians are
profound and diligent searchers into Nature; they, because of their
skill, know how to anticipate an effort,[10] the which to the vulgar
shall seem to be a miracle.

Origen saith that the Magical Art doth not contain anything subsisting,
but although it should, yet that it must not be Evil, or subject to
contempt or scorn; and doth distinguish the _Natural Magic_ from that
which is _Diabolical_.

Apollonius Tyannaeus only exercised the _Natural Magic_, by the which he
did perform wonderful things.

Philo Hebraeus saith that true Magic, by which we do arrive at the
understanding of the Secret Works of Nature, is so far from being
contemptible that the greatest Monarchs and Kings have studied it. Nay!
among the Persians none might reign unless he was skilful in this GREAT
ART.

This Noble Science often degenerateth, from _Natural_ becometh
_Diabolical_, and from _True Philosophy_ turneth unto _Nigromancy_.[11]
The which is wholly to be charged upon its followers, who, abusing or
not being capable of that High and Mystical Knowledge do immediately
hearken unto the temptations of _Sathan_, and are misled by him into the
Study of the _Black Art_. Hence it is that Magic lieth under disgrace,
and they who seek after it are vulgarly esteemed _Sorcerers_.

The Fraternity of the Rosie Crusians thought it not fit to style
themselves Magicians, but rather Philosophers. And they be not ignorant
Empiricks,[12] but learned and experienced Physicians, whose remedies be
not only _Lawful_ but _Divine_.

Footnote 7:

  This Preliminary Definition of Magic is found in very few Codices, and
  is probably later than the body of the work.

Footnote 8:

  Or Actives.

Footnote 9:

  Or Passives.

Footnote 10:

  Or Effect.

Footnote 11:

  Or the Black Art, as distinct from mere Necromancy, or Divination by
  the Dead.

Footnote 12:

  Or Quacks and Pretenders. Vide note on p. 10.




                  THE BRIEF INTRODUCTORY DESCRIPTION.


(N.B. This is taken from several MS. Codices, of which the four
principal variations are here composed together in parallel columns as
an example of the close agreement of the various texts of the Lemegeton.

For in the whole work the differences in the wording of the various
Codices are not sufficient to require the constant giving of parallel
readings; but except in the more ancient examples there is much
deterioration in the Seals and Sigils, so that in this latter respect
the more recent exemplars are not entirely reliable.)


                       CLAVICULA SALOMONIS REGIS,


which containeth all the Names, Offices, and Orders of all the Spirits
that ever he had converse with, with the Seals and Characters to each
Spirit and the manner of calling them forth to visible appearance:

In 5 parts, viz.:

(1) THE FIRST PART is a Book of Evil Spirits, called GOETIA, showing how
he bound up those Spirits, and used them in general things, whereby he
obtained great fame.

(2) THE SECOND PART is a Book of Spirits, partly Evil and partly Good,
which is named THEURGIA-GOETIA, all Aërial Spirits, etc.

(3) THE THIRD PART is of Spirits governing the Planetary Hours, and what
Spirits belong to every degree, of the Signs, and Planets in the Signs.
Called the PAULINE ART, etc.

(4) THE FOURTH PART of this Book is called ALMADEL or SOLOMON, which
containeth those Spirits which govern the Four Altitudes, or the 360
Degrees of the Zodiac.

These two last Orders of Spirits are Good, and to be sought for by
Divine seeking, etc., and are called THEURGIA.

(5) THE FIFTH PART is a Book of Orations and Prayers that Wise Solomon
used upon the Altar in the Temple. The which is called ARS NOVA, which
was revealed unto Solomon by that Holy Angel of God called MICHAEL; and
he also received many brief Notes written with the Finger of God, which
were declared to him by the said Angel with Claps of Thunder; without
which Notes King Solomon had never obtained his great knowledge, for by
them in a short time he knew all Arts and Sciences both Good and Bad;
from these Notes it is called the NOTARY ART, etc.


                   THE WHOLE LEMEGETON OR CLAVICULA.


Now this Book containeth all the Names, Orders, and Offices of all the
Spirits with which Solomon ever conversed, the Seals and Characters
belonging to each Spirit, and the manner of calling them forth to
visible appearance:

Divided into 5 special Books or parts, viz.:

(1) THE FIRST BOOK, or PART, which is a Book concerning Spirits of Evil,
and which is termed THE GOETIA OF SOLOMON, sheweth forth his manner of
binding these Spirits for use in things divers. And hereby did he
acquire great renown.

(2) THE SECOND BOOK is one which treateth of Spirits mingled of Good and
Evil Natures, the which is entitled THE THEURGIA-GOETIA, or the Magical
Wisdom of the Spirits Aërial, whereof some do abide, but certain do
wander and abide not.

(3) THE THIRD BOOK, called ARS PAULINA, or THE ART PAULINE, treateth of
the Spirits allotted unto every degree of the 360 Degrees of the Zodiac;
and also of the Signs, and of the Planets in the Signs, as well as of
the Hours.

(4) THE FOURTH BOOK, called ARS ALMADEL SALOMONIS, or THE ART ALMADEL OF
SOLOMON, concerneth those Spirits which be set over the Quaternary of
the Altitudes.

These two last mentioned Books, the ART PAULINE and the ART ALMADEL, do
relate unto Good Spirits alone, whose knowledge is to be obtained
through seeking unto the Divine. These two Books be also classed
together under the Name of the First and Second Parts of the Book
THEURGIA OF SOLOMON.

(5) THE FIFTH BOOK of the Lemegeton is one of Prayers and Orations. The
which Solomon the Wise did use upon the Altar in the Temple. And the
titles hereof be ARS NOVA, the NEW ART, and ARS NOTARIA, the NOTARY ART.
The which was revealed to him by MICHAEL, that Holy Angel of God, in
thunder and in lightning, and he further did receive by the aforesaid
Angel certain Notes written by the Hand of God, without the which that
Great King had never attained unto his great Wisdom, for thus he knew
all things and all Sciences and Arts whether Good or Evil.


                       CLAVICULA SALOMONIS REGIS,


which containeth all the Names, Offices, and Orders of all the Spirits
with whom he ever held any converse; together with the Seals and
Characters proper unto each Spirit, and the method of calling them forth
to visible appearance:

In 5 parts, viz.:

(1) THE FIRST PART is a Book of Evil Spirits, called GOETIA, showing how
he bound up those Spirits and used them in things general and several,
whereby he obtained great fame.

(2) THE SECOND PART is a Book of Spirits, partly Evil and partly Good,
which is called THEURGIA-GOETIA, all Aërial Spirits, etc.

(3) THE THIRD PART is of Spirits governing the Planetary Hours, and of
what Spirits do belong to every Degree of the Signs, and of the Planets
in the Signs. This is called the PAULINE ART, etc.

(4) THE FOURTH PART of this Book is called ALMADEL OF SOLOMON, the which
containeth those Spirits which do govern the Four Altitudes, or the 360
Degrees of the Zodiac.

These two last Orders of Spirits are Good, and are called THEURGIA, and
are to be sought for by Divine seeking, etc.

(5) THE FIFTH PART is a Book of Orations and Prayers which Wise Solomon
did use upon the Altar in the Temple. The which is called ARS NOVA, the
which was revealed to Solomon by that Holy Angel of God called Michael;
and he also received many brief Notes written with the Finger of God,
which were declared to him by the said Angel with Claps of Thunder;
without which Notes King Solomon had never obtained his Great Wisdom,
for by them in short time he gained Knowledge of all Arts and Sciences
both Good and Bad; from these Notes it is called the NOTARY ART, etc.




                       THE BOOK OF EVIL SPIRITS.


The Key of Solomon, which contains all the names, orders, and offices of
all the Spirits that ever Solomon conversed with, together with the
Seals and Characters belonging to each Spirit, and the manner of calling
them forth to visible appearance:

In 4 parts.

(1) THE FIRST PART is a Book of Evil Spirits, called GOETIA, showing how
he bound up those Spirits and used them in several things, whereby he
obtained great fame.

(2) THE SECOND PART is a Book of Spirits, partly Good and partly Evil,
which is named THEURGIA-GOETIA, all Aërial Spirits, etc.

(3) THE THIRD PART is a Book governing the Planetary Houses, and what
Spirits belong to every Degree of the Signs, and Planets in the Signs.
Called the Pauline Art.

(4) THE FOURTH PART is a Book called the ALMADEL OF SOLOMON, which
contains Twenty Chief Spirits who govern the Four Altitudes, or the 360
Degrees of the Zodiac.

These two last Orders of Spirits are Good, and called THEURGIA, and are
to be sought after by Divine seeking.

These Most Sacred Mysteries were revealed unto Solomon.

Now in this Book LEMEGETON is contained the whole Art of King Solomon.
And although there be many other Books that are said to be his, yet none
is to be compared hereunto, for this containeth them all. Though there
be titles with several other Names of the Book, as THE BOOK HELISOL,
which is the very same with this last Book of Lemegeton called ARS NOVA
or ARS NOTARIA, etc.

These Books were first found in the Chaldee and Hebrew Tongues at
Jerusalem by a Jewish Rabbi; and by him put into the Greek language and
thence into the Latin, as it is said.




                            SHEMHAMPHORASH.


[Transcriber’s Note: The references below to seals, such as “And this is
his Seal...”, are to the images printed above in the illustrations at
the start of the book, each indicated by the number of each spirit.]


(1.) BAEL.—The First Principal Spirit is a King ruling in the East,
called Bael. He maketh thee to go Invisible. He ruleth over 66 Legions
of Infernal Spirits. He appeareth in divers shapes, sometimes like a
Cat, sometimes like a Toad, and sometimes like a Man, and sometimes all
these forms at once. He speaketh hoarsely. This is his character which
is used to be worn as a Lamen before him who calleth him forth, or else
he will not do thee homage.

(2.) AGARES.—The Second Spirit is a Duke called Agreas, or Agares. He is
under the Power of the East, and cometh up in the form of an old fair
Man, riding upon a Crocodile, carrying a Goshawk upon his fist, and yet
mild in appearance. He maketh them to run that stand still, and bringeth
back runaways. He teaches all Languages or Tongues presently. He hath
power also to destroy Dignities both Spiritual and Temporal, and causeth
Earthquakes. He was of the Order of Virtues. He hath under his
government 31 Legions of Spirits. And this is his Seal or Character
which thou shalt wear as a Lamen before thee.

(3.) VASSAGO.—The Third Spirit is a Mighty Prince, being of the same
nature as Agares. He is called Vassago. This Spirit is of a Good Nature,
and his office is to declare things Past and to Come, and to discover
all things Hid or Lost. And he governeth 26 Legions of Spirits, and this
is his Seal.

(4.) SAMIGINA, or GAMIGIN.—The Fourth Spirit is Samigina, a Great
Marquis. He appeareth in the form of a little Horse or Ass, and then
into Human shape doth he change himself at the request of the Master. He
speaketh with a hoarse voice. He ruleth over 30 Legions of Inferiors. He
teaches all Liberal Sciences, and giveth account of Dead Souls that died
in sin. And his Seal is this, which is to be worn before the Magician
when he is Invocator, etc.

(5.) MARBAS.—The fifth Spirit is Marbas. He is a Great President, and
appeareth at first in the form of a Great Lion, but afterwards, at the
request of the Master, he putteth on Human Shape. He answereth truly of
things Hidden or Secret. He causeth Diseases and cureth them. Again, he
giveth great Wisdom and Knowledge in Mechanical Arts; and can change men
into other shapes. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is
this, which is to be worn as aforesaid.

(6.) VALEFOR.—The Sixth Spirit is Valefor. He is a mighty Duke, and
appeareth in the shape of a Lion with an Ass’s Head, bellowing. He is a
good Familiar, but tempteth them he is a familiar of to steal. He
governeth 10 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which is to be worn,
whether thou wilt have him for a Familiar, or not.

(7.) AMON.—The Seventh Spirit is Amon. He is a Marquis great in power,
and most stern. He appeareth like a Wolf with a Serpent’s tail, vomiting
out of his mouth flames of fire; but at the command of the Magician he
putteth on the shape of a Man with Dog’s teeth beset in a head like a
Raven; or else like a Man with a Raven’s head (simply). He telleth all
things Past and to Come. He procureth feuds and reconcileth
controversies between friends. He governeth 40 Legions of Spirits. His
Seal is this which is to be worn as aforesaid, etc.

(8.) BARBATOS.—The Eighth Spirit is Barbatos. He is a Great Duke, and
appeareth when the Sun is in Sagittary, with four noble Kings and their
companies of great troops. He giveth understanding of the singing of
Birds, and of the Voices of other creatures, such as the barking of
Dogs. He breaketh the Hidden Treasures open that have been laid by the
Enchantments of Magicians. He is of the Order of Virtues, of which some
part he retaineth still; and he knoweth all things Past, and to come,
and conciliateth Friends and those that be in Power. He ruleth over 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal of Obedience is this, the which wear before
thee as aforesaid.

(9) PAIMON.—The Ninth Spirit in this Order is Paimon, a Great King, and
very obedient unto LUCIFER. He appeareth in the form of a Man sitting
upon a Dromedary with a Crown most glorious upon his head. There goeth
before him also an Host of Spirits, like Men with Trumpets and well
sounding Cymbals, and all other sorts of Musical Instruments. He hath a
great Voice, and roareth at his first coming, and his speech is such
that the Magician cannot well understand unless he can compel him. This
Spirit can teach all Arts and Sciences, and other secret things. He can
discover unto thee what the Earth is, and what holdeth it up in the
Waters; and what Mind is, and where it is; or any other thing thou
mayest desire to know. He giveth Dignity, and confirmeth the same. He
bindeth or maketh any man subject unto the Magician if he so desire it.
He giveth good Familiars, and such as can teach all Arts. He is to be
observed towards the West. He is of the Order of Dominations.[13] He
hath under him 200 Legions of Spirits, and part of them are of the Order
of Angels, and the other part of Potentates. Now if thou callest this
Spirit Paimon alone, thou must make him some offering; and there will
attend him two Kings called LABAL and ABALIM, and also other Spirits who
be of the Order of Potentates in his Host, and 25 Legions. And those
Spirits which be subject unto them are not always with them unless the
Magician do compel them. His Character is this which must be worn as a
Lamen before thee, etc.

(10.) BUER.—The Tenth Spirit is Buer, a Great President. He appeareth in
Sagittary, and that is his shape when the Sun is there. He teaches
Philosophy, both Moral and Natural, and the Logic Art, and also the
Virtues of all Herbs and Plants. He healeth all distempers in man, and
giveth good Familiars. He governeth 50 Legions of Spirits, and his
Character of obedience is this, which thou must wear when thou callest
him forth unto appearance.

(11.) GUSION.—The Eleventh Spirit in order is a great and strong Duke,
called Gusion. He appeareth like a Xenopilus. He telleth all things,
Past, Present, and to Come, and showeth the meaning and resolution of
all questions thou mayest ask. He conciliateth and reconcileth
friendships, and giveth Honour and Dignity unto any. He ruleth over 40
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, the which wear thou as aforesaid.

(12.) SITRI.—The Twelfth Spirit is Sitri. He is a Great Prince and
appeareth at first with a Leopard’s head and the Wings of a Gryphon, but
after the command of the Master of the Exorcism he putteth on Human
shape, and that very beautiful. He enflameth men with Women’s love, and
Women with Men’s love; and causeth them also to show themselves naked if
it be desired. He governeth 60 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, to
be worn as a Lamen before thee, etc.

(13.) BELETH.—The Thirteenth Spirit is called Beleth (or Bileth, or
Bilet). He is a mighty King and terrible. He rideth on a pale horse with
trumpets and other kinds of musical instruments playing before him. He
is very furious at his first appearance, that is, while the Exorcist
layeth his courage; for to do this he must hold a Hazel Wand in his
hand, striking it out towards the South and East Quarters, make a
triangle, △, without the Circle, and then command him into it by the
Bonds and Charges of Spirits as hereafter followeth. And if he doth not
enter into the triangle, △, at your threats, rehearse the Bonds and
Charms before him, and then he will yield Obedience and come into it,
and do what he is commanded by the Exorcist. Yet he must receive him
courteously because he is a Great King, and do homage unto him, as the
Kings and Princes do that attend upon him. And thou must have always a
Silver Ring on the middle finger of the left hand held against thy
face,[14] as they do yet before AMAYMON. This Great King Beleth causeth
all the love that may be, both of Men and of Women, until the Master
Exorcist hath had his desire fulfilled. He is of the Order of Powers,
and he governeth 85 Legions of Spirits. His Noble Seal is this, which is
to be worn before thee at working.

(14.) LERAJE, or LERAIKHA.—The Fourteenth Spirit is called Leraje (or
Leraie). He is a Marquis Great in Power, showing himself in the likeness
of an Archer clad in Green, and carrying a Bow and Quiver. He causeth
all great Battles and Contests; and maketh wounds to putrefy that are
made with Arrows by Archers. This belongeth unto Sagittary. He governeth
30 Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(15.) ELIGOS.—The Fifteenth Spirit in Order is Eligos, a Great Duke, and
appeareth in the form of a goodly Knight, carrying a Lance, an Ensign,
and a Serpent. He discovereth hidden things, and knoweth things to come;
and of Wars, and how the Soldiers will or shall meet. He causeth the
Love of Lords and Great Persons. He governeth 60 Legions of Spirits. His
Seal is this, etc.

(16.) ZEPAR.—The Sixteenth Spirit is Zepar. He is a Great Duke, and
appeareth in Red Apparel and Armour, like a Soldier. His office is to
cause Women to love Men, and to bring them together in love. He also
maketh them barren. He governeth 26 Legions of Inferior Spirits, and his
Seal is this, which he obeyeth when he seeth it.

(17.) BOTIS.—The Seventeenth Spirit is Botis, a Great President, and an
Earl. He appeareth at the first show in the form of an ugly Viper, then
at the command of the Magician he putteth on a Human shape with Great
Teeth, and two Horns, carrying a bright and sharp Sword in his hand. He
telleth all things Past, and to Come, and reconcileth Friends and Foes.
He ruleth over 60 Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(18.) BATHIN.—The Eighteenth Spirit is Bathin. He is a Mighty and Strong
Duke, and appeareth like a Strong Man with the tail of a Serpent,
sitting upon a Pale-Coloured Horse. He knoweth the Virtues of Herbs and
Precious Stones, and can transport men suddenly from one country to
another. He ruleth over 30 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this which is
to be worn as aforesaid.

(19.) SALLOS.—The Nineteenth Spirit is Sallos (or Saleos). He is a Great
and Mighty Duke, and appeareth in the form of a gallant Soldier riding
on a Crocodile, with a Ducal Crown on his head, but peaceably. He
causeth the Love of Women to Men, and of Men to Women; and governeth 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(20.) PURSON.—The Twentieth Spirit is Purson, a Great King. His
appearance is comely, like a Man with a Lion’s face, carrying a cruel
Viper in his hand, and riding upon a Bear. Going before him are many
Trumpets sounding. He knoweth all things hidden, and can discover
Treasure, and tell all things Past, Present, and to Come. He can take a
Body either Human or Aërial, and answereth truly of all Earthly things
both Secret and Divine, and of the Creation of the World. He bringeth
forth good Familiars, and under his Government there be 22 Legions of
Spirits, partly of the Order of Virtues and partly of the Order of
Thrones. His Mark, Seal, or Character is this, unto the which he oweth
obedience, and which thou shalt wear in time of action, etc.

(21.) MARAX.—The Twenty-first Spirit is Marax.[15] He is a Great Earl
and President. He appeareth like a great Bull with a Man’s face. His
office is to make Men very knowing in Astronomy, and all other Liberal
Sciences; also he can give good Familiars, and wise, knowing the virtues
of Herbs and Stones which be precious. He governeth 30 Legions of
Spirits, and his Seal is this, which must be made and worn as aforesaid,
etc.

(22.) IPOS.—The Twenty-second Spirit is Ipos. He is an Earl, and a
Mighty Prince, and appeareth in the form of an Angel with a Lion’s Head,
and a Goose’s Foot, and Hare’s Tail. He knoweth all things Past,
Present, and to Come. He maketh men witty and bold. He governeth 36
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which thou shalt wear, etc.

(23.) AIM.—The Twenty-third Spirit is Aim. He is a Great Strong Duke. He
appeareth in the form of a very handsome Man in body, but with three
Heads; the first, like a Serpent, the second like a Man having two Stars
on his Forehead, the third like a Calf. He rideth on a Viper, carrying a
Firebrand in his Hand, wherewith he setteth cities, castles, and great
Places, on fire. He maketh thee witty in all manner of ways, and giveth
true answers unto private matters. He governeth 26 Legions of Inferior
Spirits; and his Seal is this, which wear thou as aforesaid, etc.

(24.) NABERIUS.—The Twenty-fourth Spirit is Naberius. He is a most
valiant Marquis, and showeth in the form of a Black Crane, fluttering
about the Circle, and when he speaketh it is with a hoarse voice. He
maketh men cunning in all Arts and Sciences, but especially in the Art
of Rhetoric. He restoreth lost Dignities and Honours. He governeth 19
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which is to be worn, etc.

(25.) GLASYA-LABOLAS.—The Twenty-fifth Spirit is Glasya-Labolas. He is a
Mighty President and Earl, and showeth himself in the form of a Dog with
Wings like a Gryphon. He teacheth all Arts and Sciences in an instant,
and is an Author of Bloodshed and Manslaughter. He teacheth all things
Past, and to Come. If desired he causeth the love both of Friends and of
Foes. He can make a Man to go Invisible. And he hath under his command
36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, to be, etc.

(26.) BUNE, or BIMÉ.—The Twenty-sixth Spirit is Buné (or Bim). He is a
Strong, Great and Mighty Duke. He appeareth in the form of a Dragon with
three heads, one like a Dog, one like a Gryphon, and one like a Man. He
speaketh with a high and comely Voice. He changeth the Place of the
Dead, and causeth the Spirits which be under him to gather together upon
your Sepulchres. He giveth Riches unto a Man, and maketh him Wise and
Eloquent. He giveth true Answers unto Demands. And he governeth 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, unto the which he oweth Obedience.
He hath another Seal (which is the first of these,[16] but the last is
the best).[17]

(27.) RONOVÉ.—The Twenty-seventh Spirit is Ronové. He appeareth in the
Form of a Monster. He teacheth the Art of Rhetoric very well and giveth
Good Servants, Knowledge of Tongues, and Favours with Friends or Foes.
He is a Marquis and Great Earl; and there be under his command 19
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(28.) BERITH.—The Twenty-eighth Spirit in Order, as Solomon bound them,
